Publication: Spectator
Date: 18 December 1847
Reviewer: Unknown
An attempt to give novelty and interest to fiction, by resorting to those singular 'characters' that used to exist everywhere, but especially in retired and remote places. The success is not equal to the abilities of the writer; chiefly because the incidents are too coarse and disagreeable to be attractive, the very best being improbable, with a moral taint about them, and the villainy not leading to results sufficient to justify the elaborate pains taken in depicting it. The execution, however, is good: grant the writer all that is requisite as regards matter, and the delineation is forcible and truthful.


Publication: Athenaeum
Date: 25 December 1847
Reviewer: H F Chorley
In spite of much power and cleverness; in spite of its truth to life in the remote nooks and corners of England, 'Wuthering Heights' is a disagreeable story. The Bells seem to affect painful and exceptional subjects: – the misdeeds and oppressions of tyranny – the eccentricities of "woman's fantasy". They do not turn away from dwelling upon those physical acts of cruelty which we know to have their warrant in the real annals of crime and suffering, – but the contemplation of which true taste rejects. The brutal master of the lonely house on "Wuthering Heights" – a prison which might be pictured from life – has doubtless had his prototype in those ungenial and remote districts where human beings, like the trees, grow gnarled and dwarfed and distorted by inclement climate; but he might have been indicated with far fewer touches, in place of so entirely filling the canvas that there is hardly a scene untainted by his presence.
Original source: Wuthering Heights (Barnes and Noble)

Publication: North British Review
Date: about 1847
Reviewer: James LorimerPublication: Unknown
Date: about 1847
Reviewer: Unknown
Early copies of the novel
This is a work of great ability, and contains many chapters, to the production of which talent of no common order has contributed. At the same time, the materials which the author has placed at his own disposal have been but few. In the resources of his own mind, and in his own manifestly vivid perceptions of the peculiarities of character in short, in his knowledge of human nature—has he found them all. An antiquated farm-house, a neighbouring residence of a somewhat more pretending description, together with their respective inmates, amounting to some half a dozen souls in each, constitute the material and the personal components of one of the most interesting stories we have read for many a long day. The comfortable cheerfulness of the one abode, and the cheerless discomfort of the other—the latter being less the result of a cold and bleak situation, old and damp rooms, and (if we may use the term) of a sort of 'haunted house' appearance, than of the strange and mysterious character of its inhabitants—the loves and marriages, separations and hatreds, hopes and disappointments, of two or three generations of the gentle occupants of the one establishment, and the ruder tenants of the other, are brought before us at a moment with a tenderness, at another with a fearfulness, which appeals to our sympathies with the truest tones of the voice of nature; and it is quite impossible to read the book—and this is no slight testimony to the merits of a work of the kind—without feeling that, if placed in the same position as any one of the characters in any page of it, the chances would be twenty to one in favour of our conduct in that position being precisely such as the author has assigned to the personages he has introduced into his domestic drama. But we must at once impose upon ourselves a task—and we confess it is a hard one—we must abstain (from a regard to the space at our disposal) from yielding to the temptation by which we are beset to enter into that minute description of the plot of this very dramatic production to which such a work has an undoubted claim. It is not every day that so good a novel makes its appearance; and to give its contents in detail would be depriving many a reader of half the delight he would experience from the perusal of the work itself. To its pages we must refer him, then; there will he have ample opportunity of sympathising,—if he has one touch of nature that 'makes the whole world kin'—with the feelings of childhood, youth, manhood, and age, and all the emotions and passions which agitate the restless bosom of humanity. May he derive from it the delight we have ourselves experienced, and be equally grateful to its author for the genuine pleasure he has afforded him.

*Publication: Examiner
Date: 8 January 1848
Reviewer: Anonymous
This is a strange book. It is not without evidences of considerable power: but, as a whole, it is wild, confused, disjointed, and improbable; and the people who make up the drama, which is tragic enough in its consequences, are savages ruder than those who lived before the days of Homer. With the exception of Heathcliff, the story is confined to the family of Earnshaw, who intermarry with the Lintons; and the scene of their exploits is a rude old-fashioned house, at the top of one of the high moors or fells in the north of England. Whoever has traversed the bleak heights of Hartside or Cross Fell, on his road from Westmoreland to the dales of Yorkshire, and has been welcomed there by the winds and rain on a 'gusty day', will know how to estimate the comforts of  Wuthering Heights in wintry weather….
If this book be, as we apprehend it is, the first work of the author, we hope that he will produce a second,—giving himself more time in its composition than in the present case, developing his incidents more carefully, eschewing exaggeration and obscurity, and looking steadily at human life, under all its moods, for those pictures of the passions that he may desire to sketch for our public benefit. It may be well also to be sparing of certain oaths and phrases, which do not materially contribute to any character, and are by no means to be reckoned among the evidences of a writer's genius. We detest the affectation and effeminate frippery which is but too frequent in the modern novel, and willingly trust ourselves with an author who goes at once fearlessly into the moors and desolate places, for his heroes; but we must at the same time stipulate with him that he shall not drag into light all that he discovers, of coarse and loathsome, in his wanderings, but simply so much good and ill as he may find necessary to elucidate his history—so much only as may be interwoven inextricably with the persons whom he professes to paint. It is the province of an artist to modify and in some cases refine what he beholds in the ordinary world. There never was a man whose daily life (that is to say, all his deeds and sayings, entire and without exception) constituted fit materials for a book of fiction.

*Publication: Douglas Jerrold’s Weekly Newspaper
Date: 15 January 1848
Reviewer: Anonymous
Wuthering Heights is a strange sort of book,—baffling all regular criticism; yet, it is impossible to begin and not finish it; and quite as impossible to lay it aside afterwards and say nothing about it. In the midst of the reader's perplexity the ideas predominant in his mind concerning this book are likely to be—brutal cruelty, and semi-savage love. What may be the moral which the author wishes the reader to deduce from his work, it is difficult to say; and we refrain from assigning any, because to speak honestly, we have discovered none but mere glimpses of hidden morals or secondary meanings. There seems to us great power in this book but a purposeless power, which we feel a great desire to see turned to better account. We are quite confident that the writer of Wuthering Heights wants but the practised skill to make a great artist; perhaps, a great dramatic artist. His qualities are, at present, excessive; a far more promising fault, let it be remembered, than if they were deficient. He may tone down, whereas the weak and inefficient writer, however carefully he may write by rule and line, will never work up his productions to the point of beauty in art. In Wuthering Heights the reader is shocked, disgusted, almost sickened by details of cruelty, inhumanity, and the most diabolical hate and vengeance, and anon come passages of powerful testimony to the supreme power of love—even over demons in the human form. The women in the book are of a strange fiendish-angelic nature, tantalising, and terrible, and the men are indescribable out of the book itself. Yet, towards the close of the story occurs the following pretty, soft picture, which comes like the rainbow after a storm….

*Publication: Atlas
Date: 22 January 1848
Reviewer: Anonymous
 Wuthering Heights is a strange, inartistic story. There are evidences in every chapter of a sort of rugged power—an unconscious strength—which the possessor seems never to think of turning to the best advantage. The general effect is inexpressibly painful. We know nothing in the whole range of our fictitious literature which presents such shocking pictures of the worst forms of humanity. Jane Eyre is a book which affects the reader to tears; it touches the most hidden sources of emotion. Wuthering Heights casts a gloom over the mind not easily to be dispelled. It does not soften; it harasses, it extenterates…. There are passages in it which remind us of the Nowlans of the late John Banim but of all pre-existent works the one which it most recalls to our memory is the History of Mathew Wald. It has not, however, the unity and concentration of that fiction; but is a sprawling story, carrying us, with no mitigation of anguish, through two generations of sufferers—though one presiding evil genius sheds a grim shadow over the whole, and imparts a singleness of malignity to the somewhat disjointed tale. A more natural story we do not remember to have read. Inconceivable as are the combinations of human degradation which are here to be found moving within the circle of a few miles, the vraisemblance is so admirably preserved; there is so much truth in what we may call the costumery (not applying the word in its narrow acceptation)—the general mounting of the entire piece—that we readily identify the scenes and personages of the fiction; and when we lay aside the book it is some time before we can persuade ourselves that we have held nothing more than imaginary intercourse with the ideal creations of the brain. The reality of unreality has never been so aptly illustrated as in the scenes of almost savage life which Ellis Bell has brought so vividly before us.
The book sadly wants relief. A few glimpses of sunshine would have increased the reality of the picture and given strength rather than weakness to the whole. There is not in the entire dramatis persona, a single character which is not utterly hateful or thoroughly contemptible. If you do not detest the person, you despise him; and if you do not despise him, you detest him with your whole heart. Hindley, the brutal, degraded sot, strong in the desire to work all mischief, but impotent in his degradation; Linton Heathcliff, the miserable, drivelling coward, in whom we see selfishness in its most abject form; and Heathcliff himself, the presiding evil genius of the piece, the tyrant father of an imbecile son, a creature in whom every evil passion seems to have reached a gigantic excess—form a group of deformities such as we have rarely seen gathered together on the same canvas. The author seems to have designed to throw some redeeming touches into the character of the brutal Heathcliff, by portraying him as one faithful to the idol of his boyhood—loving to the very last—long, long after death had divided them, the unhappy girl who had cheered and brightened up the early days of his wretched life. Here is the touch of nature which makes the whole world kin—but it fails of the intended effect. There is a selfishness—a ferocity in the love of Heathcliff, which scarcely suffer it, in spite of its rugged constancy, to relieve the darker parts of his nature. Even the female characters excite something of loathing and much of contempt. Beautiful and loveable in their childhood, they all, to use a vulgar expression, 'turn out badly'. Catherine the elder—wayward, impatient, impulsive—sacrifices herself and her lover to the pitiful ambition of becoming the wife of a gentleman of station. Hence her own misery—her early death—and something of the brutal wickedness of Heathcliff's character and conduct; though we cannot persuade ourselves that even a happy love would have tamed down the natural ferocity of the tiger. Catherine the younger is more sinned against than sinning, and in spite of her grave moral defects, we have some hope of her at the last….

Publication: New Monthly Magazine
Date: January 1848
Reviewer: Anonymous
Wuthering Heights, by Ellis Bell, is a terrific story, associated with an equally fearful and repulsive spot. It should have been called  Withering Heights, for any thing from which the mind and body would more instinctively shrink, than the mansion and its tenants, cannot be imagined. …Our novel reading experience does not enable us to refer to anything to be compared with the personages we are introduced to at this desolate spot – a perfect misanthropist's heaven.

Publication: Graham’s Lady’s Magazine (USA)
Date: July 1848
Reviewer: Anonymous
How a human being could have attempted such a book as the present without committing suicide before he had finished a dozen chapters, is a mystery. It is a compound of vulgar depravity and unnatural horrors….

Publication: North American Review
Date: October 1848
Reviewer: Edwin P Whipple

The truth is, that the whole firm of Bell & Co. seem to have a sense of the depravity of human nature peculiarly their own. It is the yahoo, not the demon, that they select for representation; their Pandemonium is of mud rather than fire. This is especially the case with Acton Bell, the author of Wuthering Heights, The Tenant of Wildfell Hall, and, if we mistake not, of certain offensive but powerful portions of Jane Eyre. Acton, when left altogether to his own imaginations, seems to take a morose satisfaction in developing a full and complete science of human brutality. In Wuthering Heights he has succeeded in reaching the summit of this laudable ambition. He appears to think that spiritual wickedness is a combination of animal ferocities, and has accordingly made a compendium of the most striking qualities of tiger, wolf, cur, and wild-cat, in the hope of framing out of such elements a suitable brute-demon to serve as the hero of his novel. [Heathcliff] is a deformed monster, whom the Mephistopheles of Goethe would have nothing to say to, whom the Satan of Milton would consider as an object of simple disgust, and to whom Dante would hesitate in awarding the honour of a place among those whom he has consigned to the burning pitch. This epitome of brutality, disavowed by man and devil, Mr. Acton Bell attempts in two whole volumes to delineate, and certainly he is to be congratulated on his success. As he is a man of uncommon talents, it is needless to say that it is to his subject and his dogged manner of handling it that we are to refer the burst of dislike with which the novel was received. His mode of delineating a bad character is to narrate every offensive act and repeat every vile expression which are characteristic. Hence, in  Wuthering Heights, he details all the ingenuities of animal malignity, and exhausts the whole rhetoric of stupid blasphemy, in order that there may be no mistake as to the kind of person he intends to hold up to the popular gaze. Like all spendthrifts of malice and profanity, however, he overdoes the business. Though he scatters oaths as plentifully as sentimental writers do interjections, the comparative parsimony of the great novelists in this respect is productive of infinitely more effect. It must be confessed that this coarseness, though the prominent, is not the only characteristic of the writer. His attempt at originality does not stop with the conception of [Heathcliff], but he aims further to exhibit the action of the sentiment of love on the nature of the being whom his morbid imagination has created. This is by far the ablest and most subtile portion of his labours, and indicates that strong hold upon the elements of character, and that decision of touch in the delineation of the most evanescent qualities of emotion, which distinguish the mind of the whole family. For all practical purposes, however, the power evinced in Wuthering Heights is power thrown away. Nightmares and dreams, through which devils dance and wolves howl, make bad novels.

Symbols & Figurative Language
Emily Bronte’s timeless classic is a fascinating mix of gothic elements and tragic narratives. The book immerses readers in a story of revenge and self-destruction. The novel also describes other negative phenomena, such as domestic violence or misogyny.


Wuthering Heights has different symbols. They create a unique atmosphere and emotional response people experience when reading. Check out their meanings:

Dogs
In Wuthering Heights, dogs symbolize violence and the brutality of human nature. They also serve as extensions of their masters’ personalities. For instance, when Lockwood attempts to enter Wuthering Heights, Heathcliff’s dogs attack him, reflecting their master’s lack of hospitality. Another example of these animals’ symbolism is Heathcliff’s treatment of Isabella’s dog, Fanny. He hangs up the dog, which foreshadows how this man will treat his new bride in the future.

Doors and Windows
Many characters can’t get what they want in the Wuthering Heights novel. So, doors and windows represent obstacles and the damaging effects of revenge. In the story, people are kept away by doors or try to escape through them. The most vibrant example of this symbolism comes when Heathcliff turns Catherine Linton into a prisoner and locks her inside Wuthering Heights. However, they also represent change, as seen when Heathcliff opens the window to let the ghost of Catherine Earnshaw return to her birthplace.

Ghosts
The ghosts represent the people who are haunting the residents of Thrushcross Grange and Wuthering Heights. They are also devices that show the past, memories, the themes of good versus evil, love, and obsession. Heathcliff, in particular, wants the ghost of Catherine Earnshaw to haunt him. In Bronte’s masterpiece, he goes as far as cursing her and wishing she would find no peace as long as he was alive. She doesn’t, and she only seems to leave the earth after the death of her love.

Moors
The moors represent several things throughout the Wuthering Heights novel. They are an infertile place that’s bare of any suitable agricultural land. In Bronte’s work, the moors show the distance between the characters and the physical locations of Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange. They are also a wild country representing freedom away from unhappy home lives and class differences. It’s the only place where Catherine Earnshaw and Heathcliff can be happy together. But it also represents a danger, as the moors are hard to navigate without getting lost.

Locket of Catherine
Catherine Earnshaw’s locket is a physical representation of her heart. When she was alive, Catherine had a lock of Edgar Linton’s hair in the item, symbolizing her connection and love for the man. However, after her death, Heathcliff, like a true Byronic hero, finds the lock, throws it out, and replaces Edgar’s hair with his own. Nelly sees the replacement, intertwines Heathcliff’s lock with Edgar’s, and puts them both in the locket. This episode symbolizes that both men were crucial to Catherine and that their fates are linked.

Hair Colors
Emily Bronte heavily uses hair colors to represent different notions. Blond and bright hair colors represent aristocracy, privilege, gentleness, and education. They are also the symbolic sigil of Thrushcross Grange and the Linton family. Black and dark hair marks strength, passion, and lost privilege. It represents the Wuthering Heights and the Earnshaw family. Thanks to Cathy’s and Hareton’s love, these symbols are intertwined by the novel’s end.

Foreshadowing
In many subtle scenes, Emily Bronte uses foreshadowing to foretell the fates of Heathcliff and Catherine Earnshaw. Some events predict what will happen later in the story, even the bittersweet ending where people get what they want the most.

One example is the night when Heathcliff runs away from Wuthering Heights. A summer thunderstorm had begun, which was out of season, and no one had expected it. It was a sign of the hostility to the world and the coming pain the young man would feel.

About midnight, while we still sat up, the storm came rattling over the Heights in full fury. There was a violent wind, as well as thunder, and either one or the other split a tree off at the corner of the building; a huge bough fell across the roof, and knocked down a portion of the east chimney-stack, sending a clatter of stones and soot into the kitchen fire.
(Wuthering Heights, Chapter 9)

Allusion
The book is full of allusions to gothic and romantic works. It has many references to Greek mythology, the Bible, and even fairy tales. This device shows that Emily Bronte was an avid reader. This quote from Wuthering Heights illustrates the use of allusion the best:

I was only going to say that heaven did not seem to be my home; and I broke my heart with weeping to come back to earth; and the angels were so angry that they flung me out into the middle of the heath on the top of Wuthering Heights; where I woke sobbing for joy. That will do to explain my secret, as well as the other. I’ve no more business to marry Edgar Linton than I have to be in heaven; and if the wicked man in there had not brought Heathcliff so low, I shouldn’t have thought of it.
(Wuthering Heights, Chapter 9)

Conflict
Internal and external conflicts play a significant part in the novel. The main plot line revolves around Catherine and Heathcliff’s destructive love story. It also covers Heathcliff’s revenge against people who have wronged him, like Hindley Earnshaw. As for external conflict, Emily Bronte represents it through the issues of class differences in the Victorian era.

Irony
Despite the serious tone of the novel, it has some elements of irony, especially when it comes to Heathcliff’s character. When raising the son of Hindley Earnshaw, Heathcliff shows the same level of cruelty as he experienced in childhood. He wants to make Hareton suffer as much as he did, telling the boy with dark humor:

Now, my bonny lad, you are MINE! And we’ll see if one tree won’t grow as crooked as another, with the same wind to twist it!
(Wuthering Heights, Chapter 17)

Motifs
The writer uses the motif of pairs, organizing characters and places into sets of two elements. For instance, the novel describes two houses — Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange, which represent opposing worldviews. Besides, Catherine’s character is divided into two conflicting sides: one wants to be with Heathcliff, and the other wishes to be with Edgar.

Another motif is repetition. In the novel, the names of the characters from different generations are repeated, and the events from the past happen again in the present. The cycle of revenge is a good representation of this motif. It is best described in this scene:

I’m trying to settle how I shall pay Hindley back. I don’t care how long I wait, if I can only do it at last. I hope he will not die before I do! I only wish I knew the best way! Let me alone, and I’ll plan it out: while I’m thinking of that I don’t feel pain.
(Wuthering Heights, Chapter 7)

Personification
Emily Bronte uses personification in her descriptions of Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange. Both places have the look and feel that represent their owners’ families.

One example of this literary device is the scene when Lockwood first met Heathcliff. The entire place was so unfriendly that even the gate was difficult to open. In this way, the author wanted to show that Heathcliff was not welcoming of Lockwood’s presence. Check out the example:

The ‘walk-in’ was uttered with closed teeth and expressed the sentiment, ‘Go to the Deuce:’ even the gate over which he leant manifested no sympathizing movement to the words; and I think that circumstance determined me to accept the invitation: I felt interested in a man who seemed more exaggeratedly reserved than myself.
(Wuthering Heights, Chapter 1)

Similes
The author often uses similes to provide more vivid descriptions. This literary device makes readers better understand different characters and their traits. Here’s a quote that shows how Catherine sees her relationships with two men:

My love for Linton is like the foliage in the woods: time will change it, I’m well aware, as winter changes the trees. My love for Heathcliff resembles the eternal rocks beneath: a source of little visible delight, but necessary.
(Wuthering Heights, Chapter 9)

Metaphor
Emily Bronte heavily relies on metaphors by comparing people to objects. The wild moors, where most of the story takes place, symbolize freedom, wilderness, nature, and the love between Heathcliff and Catherine. In the following example, you can see a metaphor about a sheep and a wild beast to represent the relationship of Heathcliff, the Earnshaws, and the Lintons.

I wanted something to happen which might have the effect of freeing both Wuthering Heights and the Grange of Mr. Heathcliff quietly; leaving us as we had been prior to his advent. His visits were a continual nightmare to me; and, I suspected, to my master also. His abode at the Heights was an oppression past explaining. I felt that God had forsaken the stray sheep there to its own wicked wanderings, and an evil beast prowled between it and the fold, waiting his time to spring and destroy.
(Wuthering Heights, Chapter 10)

Imagery
Readers can come across many instances of imagery that evoke an emotional response. The setting creates a vivid backdrop that mirrors the volatile inner lives of the novel’s characters. Here’s what it looks like in the text when Catherine uses nature imagery to describe Heathcliff’s inner essence to Isabella:

Tell her what Heathcliff is: an unreclaimed creature without refinement, without cultivation, an arid wilderness of furze and whinstone. I’d as soon put that little canary into the park on a winter’s day as I recommend you bestow your heart on him! It is deplorable ignorance of his character, child, and nothing else that makes that dream enter your head. Pray, don’t imagine that he conceals depths of benevolence and affection beneath a stern exterior! He’s not a rough diamond—a pearl-containing oyster of a rustic: he’s a fierce, pitiless, wolfish man.
(Wuthering Heights, Chapter 10)

Allegory
Emily Bronte used allegory to represent the novel’s central idea — unrequited love traumatizes and destroys characters over generations. You can see it in how Heathcliff treats people around him, especially his wife, Isabella Linton, and Hareton, Hindley Earnshaw’s son.

However, the most perfect example of allegory is the image of two settings: Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange. These places show two central male characters, Heathcliff and Edgar Linton. They’re like two horrible dark monsters. First, Edgar bullies Heathcliff because he’s a stranger. Then, once Heathcliff becomes influential, he begins to take revenge on the offender.

The Setting of Wuthering Heights
The locations of Wuthering Heights can be considered a literary device on their own, considering their significance throughout the story. The novel is set at the beginning of the 19th century, with most of its events taking place in the late 18th century. Its narrative is dark and rugged, and so are the main locations in the middle of the Yorkshire moors. The setting of Wuthering Heights can be interpreted as the nature of life that some can withstand and others can’t.


The two primary locations of this book are Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange. The first place is dark and cold, located on a high hill. It feels almost like a castle, with the word “wuthering” being a local dialect used to describe the area’s turbulent weather and atmospheric conditions.

The second central location is its complete opposite: welcoming and bright, situated in a lush valley below. These places represent their inhabitants’ conditions and attitudes and, most importantly, the contrast between the wilderness and civilization.

Abstract. Emily Bronte, the 19th-century British writer, occupies an important and unique position
in British literary history and though she only had one novel---Wuthering Heights, she was still one
of the most influential writers in the world literature. The paper will analyze the gothic style in
Wuthering Heights mainly from four aspects, including the theme selection, characterization,
depiction of the environment and the use of supernatural factors.
1. Introduction
Emily Bronte, the 19th-century British writer, was born in a poor clerical family. The Bronte sisters
were influenced by the gothic style as a whole. Wuthering Heights, Emily’s masterpiece, integrated
romanticism and realism with strong gothic style. But this work wasn't recognized when it was
firstly published. With the further study, it re-entered people's visions. Its strong emotions, plotsuspended narrative technique and portrayed characters made it reinvigorate gloriously.
Gothic novel, mainly back to the Middle Ages, described the stories taking place in the deserted
places like castles, cloisters, ruins and wasteland, etc. It mainly focused on the theme of hatred and
succession struggles. The plots were horrible and thrilling and full of murders, revenge and also
many supernatural phenomena (like the ghost), which created a ghastly, mysterious, horrible and
suspenseful atmospheres with the main characteristics of horror, mystery and weirdness. Wuthering
Heights, a work fully possessing gothic color, typically reflected the features of the gothic novel.
2. Theme Selection 
In presenting the theme, the author Emily Bronte continued with the features of the gothic novel.
The novel began when old Earnshaw of the Wuthering Heights took the orphan Heathcliff home.
Since then, Heathcliff stayed there and became a good playmate with Catherine Earnshaw who was
old Earnshaw's daughter. Once, Catherine stayed in Thrushcross Grange to recover. When she got
home, she began to behave like a cultured and superior lady. Her attitude towards Heathcliff was
not as good as before. In such circumstances, Heathcliff disappeared after hearing the news that
Catherine accepted the host of Thrushcross Grange---Edgar Linton's proposal. After getting married,
Catherine scraped through her life with contradictions and remorse. Unexpectedly, Heathcliff came
back. Because of illness, Catherine was stimulated mentally and got schizophrenia. Heathcliff
turned to Isabella Linton for love and tempted her to elope with him. However, Catherine died after
she gave her daughter Catherine Linton's birth. Facing the death of Catherine, Heathcliff decided to
revenge. After getting married, Isabella was imprisoned and after her escape, she gave birth to her
son Linton Heathcliff who was later taken away by Edgar. After the death of Snyder, Heathcliff
took away the Wuthering Heights. Heathcliff brought little Linton back. Heathcliff treated Hareton
in a cruel way and treated Earnshaw with civilized education. When Edgar was seriously ill,
Heathcliff compelled little Catherine and Linton to get married. Soon frail and sick little Linton also
died. Little Catherine and Hareton had fallen love with each other. The sight of little kids reminded
Heathcliff of the period when he and Catherine were young, and Heathcliff died after fasts.
The theme of the novel centered on revenge which was the central clue throughout the whole
3rd International Conference on Humanities and Social Science Research (ICHSSR 2017) Copyright © 2017, the Authors. Published by Atlantis Press. 
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/). 
Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 121 519
novel. When Heathcliff grew up, he returned to the Wuthering Heights for revenge; knowing that
Catherine got married, Heathcliff chose Edgar's sister as an instrument of his revenge to be married
with her; after the marriage, he kicked and imprisoned his wife and claimed the ownership of the
Wuthering Heights through gamble, which aggravated Snyder's disease and contributed to his death
indirectly; Heathcliff extended his plan of revenge to the next generation. He forced little Catherine
and little Linton to be married. The interlocking plots were tied together by the chain of revenge. It
also contained some fights over the succession, which reflected the gothic color.
3. Characterization 
In this novel, the writer created a series of full characters, like Heathcliff, Catherine and Isabella.
3.1 Heathcliff. The writer shaped Heathcliff into a consummate villain. He was a gypsy of 
discrimination with dark and dirty look and being dressed in rags. His image was portrayed by the 
writer from three stages. 
The first stage was Heathcliff's just arrival at the Wuthering Heights. At that time, he was
gloomy and endurable even facing Snyder's fists. Because of that, Heathcliff hated Snyder very
much. And Catherine, a rebellious girl, gradually started her progression from dislike to like. And
they often played together. During his growth, a detail was very notable: old Earnshaw gave a good
horse to Heathcliff and Snyder became disgruntled. Snyder hit Heathcliff and forced to take the
horse. However, Heathcliff didn't choose to hit back as a resistance. Instead, he turned to old
Earnshaw to complain about it. So Snyder was punished and Heathcliff kept his own thing. It
proved that young Heathcliff was very mature in thinking and he was aware that only power could
force others to yield. The second stage referred to the period when Heathcliff got along with
Catherine. Catherine, longing for emancipatory nature, often played with Heathcliff and made a lot
of troubles. Heathcliff was happy when he was faced with Catherine, but not for long. Catherine
empathized with Edgar, which was a devastating blow to Heathcliff. Just because of that intense
stimulation, Heathcliff couldn’t resist his anger anymore and started his way of revenge. The third
stage was Heathcliff's return. He was gloomy, cruel and wild. He hated the whole world and kept
revenging at all costs, even let himself be an instrument of his revenge. Through gamble, he took
away the Wuthering Heights; taking advantage of Isabella, he took revenge on Catherine; he
compelled the next generation to do things the way he wanted to do them in order to meet his nearly
abnormal ideas.
Through the three stages, Heathcliff, a vicious and gloomy image, was reflected onto the paper,
walking along the dark path of revenge.
3.2 Catherine. Similarly, Catherine also showed her gothic features. When she was a kid, 
Catherine had the desire of longing for nature. She always got into troubles though she had no bad 
intention, which gave her babysitter headaches. Meanwhile, she played with Heathcliff without 
tained glasses like others. During her stay in the Thrushcross Grange, Catherine became polite and
educated, but also vainglorious. It promoted her to accept Edgar's proposal. After getting married, 
Catherine didn't live a happy life as she expected. Instead, she scraped through her life with 
contradictions and remorse, which was a conflict between nature and civilization. Heathcliff 
represented nature and what was behind Edgar was civilization. In essence, that choose whom to be 
married was the battle between nature and civilization. The conflict made Catherine upset. She 
suffered a lot with schizophrenia and finally she had to taste the bitter fruits made by herself after 
their elopement.
3.3 Isabella. Isabella was the typical heroine in the traditional gothic novel. She was beautiful, 
delicate, sensitive and passive. As to Heathcliff's courtship, she got deeply stuck with great 
complacency and allowed herself to indulge in fantasies. After getting married with Heathcliff, she 
was imprisoned and was driven into a tight corner; knowing the truth, she chose to run away. Both 
mentally and behaviorally, she reflected the features of the typical heroine in the traditional gothic 
novel.
Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 121 520
4. Depiction of the Environment 
The writer transplanted the background of medieval castle in the gothic novel to the wasteland in
the real life in the north of Elizabethan England. She combined reality with weirdness, which was
ahead of her time and has taken the lead at that time.
Wuthering Heights presented by the writer was very horrible. The windows there were small with a
lot defensive stones. There were a lot of weird sculptures. Living in such an environment, wind-torn
trees would become gaunt, let alone the children. The three kids, Snyder, Catherine and Heathcliff,
had different natures, but all of them were irritable and hysterical. However, look at the Thrushcross
Grange, a pleasant place with many scarlet cushions here and there and mild candlelights in the
house. People would become gentle with a mild living condition. From Edgar and Isabella, we felt
the existence of golden mean. They didn't have strong emotions and any of their own.
5. Use of Supernatural Factors 
In this novel, the writer used a lot of supernatural factors, like nightmares, graveyards, delusion and
ghosts, etc to heighten the mysterious and weird atmosphere.
5.1 The Tenant's Dream. The writer conveyed the Wuthering Heights's mystery to the reader
with the aid of the tenant's feelings. The tenant had a vivid and terrible dream when he stayed in the
Wuthering Heights for the night. In his dream, the branch of a fir tree scratched the window. He
broke the glass only to grasp a cold finger not the branch. The owner of the finger sobbed in a
gloomy voice, "Let me in... let me in." Asked who she was, she said she was Catherine Linton. The
tenant recognized the kid's face and put her wrist to rub on the broken glasses back and forth. With
blood on her, she shouted to come in and said that she had been vagrant for 20 years. Reading this,
we looked at the Wuthering Heights with the tenant and explored its secrets. The writer created a
mysterious and suspenseful manor, which attracted readers to explore with the tenant nervously.
5.2 Catherine's illness. After getting married with Edgar, Catherine felt distressed not happy.
She was surrounded by the longstanding conditions and she was overwhelmed with serious
schizophrenia. She kept murmuring that Nelly Dean was an old witch, and there was a face in the
closet (actually it was a mirror). She couldn't even tell whether she was the girl in the Wuthering
Heights or the lady in the Thrushcross Grange when she was in a bad situation. In our daily life, it is
difficult for us to come into contact with people who are mentally ill. Even if we meet this kind of
person, we are always very cautious facing them for fear that what we have said and done would
irritate them. The writer arranged a strong conflict for Catherine. She couldn't bear it anymore and
collapsed finally. Maybe, being schizophrenic could make Catherine be herself. Her abnormal and
terrible behaviors added to the gloomy and horrible tone of living in the manor.
5.3 Heathcliff Dug the Grave at Midnight. After Catherine's death, Heathcliff's mental state
was poor. It was said by himself that he thought the only obstacle between him and Catherine was
the two-yards-thick loess. So he went to the cemetery to dig the grave and want to embrace
Catherine again. Heathcliff touched the coffin and prepared to open it. He heard someone sigh, but
there was no living creature. Heathcliff knew that it was from Catherine and she wasn't buried in the
ground but still alive. Through these creepy descriptions, we felt the horrible ghost that could sigh
and be touched like a real person. Ghost, the general element used in the gothic novel, is invisible
and omnipotent. Nobody can find its whereabouts and guess its minds. The dreaded ghost depicted
by the writer heightened the horrific and gloomy atmosphere of the novel.
5.4 Heathcliff's Dead Look and His Drifting Ghost. Heathcliff started his fast and got to the
end of his life. According to the words, we have seen a dying Heathcliff who had dark and deeper
eyes. His pale face formed a strong contrast with the dark eyes, which made people associate death
inevitably. It couldn't be more right to describe Heathcliff as an evil spirit. Heathcliff was about to
die, kept calling Catherine with hallucinations and wandered out at night. Finally, Heathcliff died
and his dead look was very horrible. His eyes were sharp and fierce, but it seemed that he was
smiling. Then, the writer brought the horrible atmosphere to a climax. Heathcliff's ghost travelled
around the church, field, and the house. It looked out of the window and was seen by a shepherd
Advances in Social Science, Education and Humanities Research, volume 121 521
boy in a rainy and dark night. We heard a more terrible legend from the villagers that we couldn't
tell what was real and what was imagined.
6. Summary
Compared with the Victorian mainstream novel, Wuthering Heights seemed to be very incompatible.
It was isolated Emily Bronte who finished this mysterious novel in her short life. Emily inherited
the romantic traditions and used vivid figures, mysterious manor, stormy weather and horrible plots,
which reflected the features of the gothic novel to readers thoroughly. Her elaborate artistic
conception, astonishing choice of theme, emotional characterization and successful application of
gothic technique, made Wuthering Heights reveal strong vitality exceeding the limit of the space
and time. It stood among the long corridor of English literature solemnly and distinctively.

Feminist criticism is the most outstanding discovery in the 
realm of theory as well as in the world of women. Feminist 
criticism comes in literary world in many forms and feminist 
critics have various goals. In them, some have been interested 
to rediscover the works of previous women writers who were 
over looked by male dominated society and others have started 
to review the books by male authors from a woman’s point of 
view. 

But a few years ago, however, feminist thought tended 
to be classified not according to topic but, rather, according to 
country of origin. Feminist literary criticism must be seen as a 
function of a political movement for women’s freedom which 
spread in Europe and America in 1960s to revive political and 
social issues which are associated with women. This practice 
reflected the fact that during 1970s and early 1980s, French, 
American and British feminists wrote from somewhat different 
perspectives. However, it is not that the women have started 
protesting against male domination and the discrimination 
against women started in the second half of 20th century for the 
first time. The voices of protest were found in the 5th century 
B.C. in Lysistrata, Aeschylus’, Agamemnon and also in the 
works of Seneca, Euripides etc. 

In Seventeenth century, Mary Astell wrote a book 
Proposal to the Ladies for the advancement of their true and 
greatest interest, which creates feminine consciousness in the 
society. But in 1792 appeared the very influential essay A 
vindication of the Rights of women by Mary Wollstone Craft’s 
which is considered as the first major document of feminism 
which gives women some scopes to judge and think their own 
situation in society. Next, John Stuart Mill in his work The 
Subjection of women which was published in 1869 raised his 
voice against the injustice on women. It was Virginia Woolf’s A 
Room of One’s Own (1928) which was not a theoretical work in 
a conventional sense but it serves as a point of departure for 
the study of women literature and he beginnings of feminist 
criticism. One of the Virginia Woolf’s most significant 
contribution to feminist criticism is discussion on language.
The view of language becomes a topic of discussion in 
feminist criticism from French feminists and feminist critics. 
French feminists wished to focus the attention on language and 
analysing the ways in which meaning is produced. They 
concluded that language as we commonly think of it is a 
decidedly male dominated realm. According to psychoanalytic 
philosopher Jacques Lacan, language is a realm of public 
discourse. It is most surprising that a child enters the linguistic 
realm when it comes to grasp its separateness from its mother 
and identifies with their father, who is the family 
representative of culture. Thus, language learned reflects a 
binary logic. According to French feminists the structure of 
language is phallocentric. Moreover, Ann Rosalind in her book 
Inscribing Feminity; French theories of the feminine. Making a 
difference; feminist literary criticism says, ‘Masculine desire 
dominates speech and posits women as an idealised fantacy 
fulfillment for the incurable emotional lack caused by 
separation from the mother’.

Language systematically forces women to choose; either 
they can imagine and represent themselves as man imagine 
and represent them. But some influential French feminist says 
that language only seems to give women such a narrow range of 
choices. In this connection early French feminist such as Annie 
Leclere, Xaviere and Marguerite Duras suggested that there is 
something that may be called lécriture féminine; women’s 
writing. Recently Julia Kristeva has said that feminine 
language is semiotic ‘not symbolic’. 

The other French feminist Helene Cixous comments in 
favour of feminine language to describe women’s bodily 
pleasure, According to Luce Irigaray, women’s sexual pleasure 
can not be expressed by the dominant, ordered, ‘logical’, 
masculine language. So Irigaray comments that women’s 
Jouissance is more multiple than male’s unitary phallic 
pleasure because ‘women has sex organ just about everywhere’, 
so feminine language is more diffusive than its masculine 
counterparts. She says, ‘That is undoubtedly the reason (…) her 
language (…) goes off in all directions and (…) he is unable to 
discern the coherence (Irigaray, p. 101-103). But other French 
feminist critics such as Christian Fauré and Catherine 
Clément said that too much emphasis on the body may reduce 
the essence of feminism.

American Feminist Critics of the 1917 and early 1918s, 
Annette Kolodny, Kate Millet, Carolyn Heilbrun and Judith 
Fetterley gave emphasis to analyze literary text rather than 
philosophising abstractly about language. Many critics want to 
review the great works by male writers examining the 
portrayals of women characters, exposing the patriarchal 
ideology implicit in such works and showing how clearly this 
tradition of systematic masculine dominance is inscribed in 
literary tradition. Another view of feminist criticism is found in 
Dale Spender’s Man Made Language (1980):

‘The semantic rule which has been responsible for the 
manifestation of sexism in the language can be simply stated; 
there are two fundamental categories, male and minus male.
To be linked with male is to be linked to a range of meanings 
which are positive and good; to be linked with this minus male 
is to be linked to the absence of those qualities. (…) The 
semantic structure of the English language reveals a great 
deals about what it means to be female in a patriarchal order.’ 
(Spender, P. 23)

Gilbert and Gubar, in The Mad Woman in the Attic (1979) 
concerned themselves with well known women writers of the 
nineteenth century, but they too found that general concern, 
images and themes recur, because the authors that they wrote 
about live in a culture whose fundamental definitions of literary 
authority are both overtly and covertly patriarchal. 
An important stage in modern feminism was reached in 
Kate Millett’s Sexual Politics (1970). She used the term 
‘patriarchy’ (rule of the father) to describe the cause of women’s 
oppression. In the earlier phase of modern feminist writings on 
literature (Kate Millett, Germaine Greer, Mary Ellmann) the 
emphasis was often quite political for expressing women’s 
‘political’ awareness of their oppression by men.
British feminists felt that the American opposition to 
male stereotypes that denigrate women often leads to counterstereotypes of feminine virtue that ignore real difference of 
race, class and culture among women.

Thus, the French, American and British approaches 
have so thoroughly judged, influenced and assimilated one 
another that the work of most western practitioners is no 
longer easily identifiable along national boundary lines. 
Showalter detects in the history of women’s writings a feminine 
phase (1840-80) in which women writers imitated dominant 
male artists norms and aesthetic standards; then a feminist 
phase (1880-1920) in which radical and often separist positions 
are maintained; and finally a female phase (1920 onward) 
which looked particularly at female writing and female 
experience. 

In this connection, Elaine Showalter described the 
change in the late 1970s as a shift of attention from ‘androtexts’ 
(book by men) to ‘gynotexts’ (books by women). she coined the 
term ‘gynocritics’ meaning the study of gynotexts but 
gynocriticism is a broad and varied field, e.g., history, styles, 
themes, genres, structures of writing by women; the 
psychodynamics of female creativity; the trajectory of the 
individual or collective female career; and the evolution or laws 
of a female literary tradition. 

Beauvior seems to propel the same confusion when she 
says: ‘Woman is however the target to two mutually exclusive 
discourses … hesitating between the role of ‘object’, ‘other’ 
which is offered her and the assertion of her liberty’. 
Wuthering Heights is a good book for practical feminist 
criticism. There are some perspectives of feminism in 
Wuthering Heights, e.g., it’s a fiction written by a woman on 
women’s lives, their sacrifice, their suffering and social 
atmosphere. 

Wuthering Heights may be examined through Feminist 
literary criticism to rediscover the novelist’s obsession on the 
repetition of names Catherine and the sexual suppression, male 
revenge are also presented in such a way that women 
characters do not get enough scopes to be an individual figure. 
So the character Chatherine was also in the minds of confusion 
to whom she will choose for her husband Edgar or Heathcliff. 
Catherine develops a double standard to accommodate her 
feelings for both Edgar and HeathCliff as Hindley degrades 
Heathcliff more and more, Ellen says she was full of ambition 
and was anxious to ingratiate herself with the Lintons. 
The scene in his duality reaches its climax is her 
confession to Ellen that she has accepted Edgar. Dreams are 
used to convey meaning to the reader in Wuthering Heights, as 
has been suggested about Lock Wood’s dream; here Catherine 
decribes her dream of being in heaven. 

I was only going to say that heaven did not seem to be my 
home; and I broke my heart with weeping to come back to 
earth; and the angels were so angry that they flung me out, 
into the middle of the Heath on top of Wuthering Heights; 
where I looked sobbing for joy. That will do to explain my 
secret, as well as the other. I’ve no more business to marry 
Edgar Linton than I how to be in heaven.

Being a woman novelist Emily Bronte is not able to show so 
much courage to break the contemporary social rules and 
regulations. Another most important event is related with 
torture on Isabella in her own house by her husband.

Catherine begins life as Catherine Earnshaw and 
Catherine Linton. Catherine’s daughter, on the other hand, 
occupies each of the names in turn and traces back the route to 
her mother’s first name. The novel thus begins and ends with 
Catherine Earnshaw. However, although the names circulate 
through the text, they create a pattern of asymmetrical 
repetition rather than of circularity. 

The story of the first Catherine hinges – as do most 
novels of the period – on her choice between two men. Choosing 
the correct husband is the central moral task set for the heroine 
of most eighteenth and nineteenth century novels, particularly 
those written by women. 

In Catherine’s case, marriage is no the answer to the 
problem of her life, the resolver of all contradictions, as it 
usually is in domestic and romantic fiction. On the contrary, 
marriage compounds the problems of Catherine’s case, 
marriage is not compounds the problems of Catherine’s life and 
exposes its contradictions. 

As a motherless, and subsequently fatherless, girl 
growing up in a geographically isolated and loosely organized 
working household, Catherine reaches puberty relatively 
untrammelled by parental notions of suitable feminine conduct. 
Her childhood is, on the whole, spent with Heathcliff in a 
private, unsocialized an ungendered moorland world. Her 
encounters with adult authority, in the form of her brother’s 
petty domestic tyranny and Joseph’s rigid Methodism, develop 
here capacity for rebellion and resistance, and she thus 
becomes an assertive child associated with the realm of nature, 
its freedom and power, rather than with the domestic and its 
constraints.

Emily Bronte’s portrayal of Catherine’s sudden and 
dramatic transformation into a genteel young lady during her 
stay at Thrushcross Grange focuses on the way in which the 
particular version of femininity involved in the ideal of female 
gentility is socially produced and reinforced, rather than 
derived from women’s “nature.” Catherine’s transformation, 
described by Nelly as a “reform”, is shown as, in fact, a process 
of formation or construction. 

Catherine’s story not only shows the limits of female 
power but also explores its problematic nature. Catherine’s 
story also dramatizes the limits of female influence. She also 
becomes the object of a competitive struggle between two men, 
each of whom wants her to conform to his own version of her. 
Catherine’s final illness is, in effect, a withdrawal from 
both the world and the self. Her derangement (pp. 118 ff.) 
enacts here experience of self-alienation. Like so many women 
in Victorian fiction, Catherine dies in Child-birth and is thus 
not required to negotiate that other profoundly ideo-logical 
version of womanhood – “the mother”.

If Cathy is a repetition of her mother, she is also a 
variation. Whereas the older Catherine’s childhood prepares 
her for the role of Gondal’s Quen, “half savage, and hardy, and 
free.” Her daughter is the spoiled, wilful, and pert fairy tale 
princess, the empress of her walled momain and mistress of her 
father and his servants. 

Thus, in another interesting variation on the pattern of 
the conduct book female and domestic romance heroine, Cathy 
is not made to pay the usual price for her feminine influence. 
Catherine also resuming control of her own life and defining 
herself a new. Cathy reconstructs both herself and Hareton. 
Whereas Catherine is destroyed by her inability to reconcile 
conflicting images of herself and the contradictory definitions of 
the feminine which confront her, Cathy negotiates them and 
ultimately constructs a new role for herself. 

Wuthering Heights was written by Emily Bronte, a great name among the Bronte sisters. This story is known as the masterpiece of English Literature and was published in 1847 under her pen name “Ellis Bell.” However, the book did not receive acclaim during that time because of the challenge that it posed to the Victorian ideas about class, morality, and religion. After a few years, the novel did win the much-desired praise. The novel presents a multigenerational story of passionate love and harsh revenge, revolving around the inhabitants of a farmhouse, Wuthering Heights, and its scornful owner, Heathcliff. The story was adapted in various films as well as plays.

The novel begins when Lockwood, a new tenant of Heathcliff, visits his landlord’s home in the remote area called Wuthering Heights, at  Thrushcross Grange Estate in Yorkshire,. Instead of getting warm treatment, he notices a strange group of people. Mr. Heathcliff looks like a nice man, in spite of sharing contrasting etiquettes. Cathy Linton, the young mistress appears a reserved but rude. Hareton is a boy, an uneducated family member and behaves like a servant. The servant Joseph who is ill-tempered all the time.

Due to heavy snow, Lockwood is forced stay at Wuthering Heights where he encounters supernatural incident, adding more to his worry. Mr. Lockwood is disturbed as he returns to Thrushcross Grange. He becomes desperate to know more about the mysterious place. As soon as he recuperates from his illness, he revisits the site and begs Nelly Dean, a servant at Wuthering Heights, to inquire the history of that haunted place.

In the flashback, the story begins thirty earlier when Mr. Earnshaw, the Wuthering Heights’ owner, brings home an orphan, a gypsy boy, intending to adopt him as his son. The boy, Heathcliff, is raised with the Earnshaw children, Catherine and Hindley. Catherine adores the company of a new member, while his brother hates him out of jealousy, thinking the boy has shared his special attention in the house. After his father’s death, Hindley leaves no stone unturned to destroy Heathcliff. Still, Catherine and Heathcliff love to spend hours in the moors, oblivious of anything until Lintons steal their precious joy.

One day, Catherine and Heathcliff visit Thrushcross Grange where Lintons lives with their children, Isabella and Edgar. Catherine and Heathcliff who are mischievous in nature, tease the children and try to escape when a bulldog chases Catherine. Seeing her in trouble, Lintons brings Catherine and Heathcliff inside. However, when they discover the truth about Catherine’s identity, they take good care of the girl but ignore Heathcliff. Soon, Catherine shares great affection with Edgar and begins to divide her time between Edgar and Heathcliff which eventually troubles Heathcliff. One day, Heathcliff overhears Catherine that she will never marry him. Feeling disappointed, he leaves the farmhouse.

When Heathcliff leave the life is almost normal at the Wuthering Heights. Catherine gets closer to Edgar and eventually marries him. Unfortunately, they fail to develop a happy union, and their relationship gets strained when Heathcliff returns as stronger man and richer than before. Also, Heathcliff takes control of Wuthering Heights by paying Hindley’s gambling debts. Heathcliff’s relationship with Lintons starts worsening as Edgar hates Catherine’s affection toward him, leading them to have a violent quarrel. The situation reaches a boiling point when Heathcliff marries Isabella to avenge ill-treatment. Meanwhile, Catherine is pregnant which causes her health to deteriorate. After a few months, Isabella and Heathcliff return to Wuthering Heights where he comes to know about Catherine’s illness and visits her in Edgar’s absence.

Their passionate reunion provides them a chance to seek forgiveness from each other and reconcile. After this memorable meeting, Catherine dies during childbirth, leaving Edgar’s daughter alive. Heathcliff continues to mourn and begs Catherine’s ghost to haunt him and becomes revengeful against other residents without any specific reasons. He, in fact, desires to gain full control of both Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange, destroying every possession of Edgar Linton. He has to endure a long wait of years to live to see these desires fulfilled.

During the intervening years, Catharine’s daughter, Cathy grows up into a beautiful girl in Grange, while Heathcliff raises Hareton, Hindley’s son, at Wuthering Heights, as an uneducated servant. One day, Cathy meets Hareton on the moors and likes him until she discovers his identity. When Cathy turns thirteen, Isabella dies, and Heathcliff brings Linton to Wuthering Heights. Filled with the fiery revenge, Heathcliff decides to use his son to control Thrushcross Grange by forcing Linton to marry Cathy. Soon after their marriage, Linton dies, and Cathy befriends Hareton whom she has always despised. Haunted by Catherine’s memories for eight years, Heathcliff, too, dies in his room, letting Cathy and Hareton restore their status and properties. The novel ends when Mr. Lockdown discovers that Cathy and Hareton are now free and have decided to marry on New Year’s Day.

Major Themes in Wuthering Heights:
Good and Evil: Good versus evil is the central theme of the novel, Wuthering Heights. The writer presented this theological conception, using emotions like love, revenge, and obsession. At first, the story shows the varied nature of the characters, either good or evil. Later, the narrator provides reasons for their indifferent behavior. For example, the mistreatment Heathcliff faces in his childhood transforms him into a revengeful person. Similarly, jealousy of Edgar and Hindley toward Heathcliff leads them to develop negative character traits. Although the novel revolves around the battle between good and evil, some characters remain good and kind such as Mrs. Dean, Catherine, and Hareton.
Violence and Revenge: Violence and revenge go hand in hand in the story. At first, the author narrates the abuse Heathcliff suffers that eventually leads him to manipulate and torture others. First, he gets revengeful toward Hindley by rendering him homeless and then keeps his son away from the world. Later, Isabella becomes the victim of his revenge and violence. He even does not leave his son as he purposefully drags him into an uncertain situation. It seems that Heathcliff enjoys causing pain and discomfort to others which becomes the thematics strand of the novel.

Class Differences: Class difference marks the center of the novel, Wuthering Heights. Emily explores the foreign concept of class distinction in-depth in the story by defining each character’s class and how these differences impact their lives. Edgar, Hindley, and Catherine belong to the wealthy class, the reason that Cathy chooses to marry Edgar. On the contrary, Heathcliff is adopted, and despite getting attached to the wealthy class, he remains overlooked. This difference instills extremely negative traits into his personality in that he becomes so bitter that he enjoys troubling others.

Relationships: The novel presents a very confusing strain of relationships. Mr. Earnshaw adopts Heathcliff but transfers his property to his son, Hindley. Cathy and Heathcliff grow up as different siblings, but they develop a strong love relationship with time, especially Heathcliff. However, Cathy revealed that she can’t marry Heathcliff. Instead, she marries Edgar Linton, belonging to a high social class. Heathcliff does not accept Cathy’s decision and decides to take revenge. Thus, he marries Edgar’s sister and makes her life hell.
Prejudice: Emily Bronte has skillfully used this theme in the storyline through various characters. For example, although Mr. Earnshaw adopts Heathcliff, he does not grant him equal rights. Also, Hindley out of spite and jealousy continues to torture and hurt him enough to make him leave Wuthering Heights. Similarly, Lintons, especially Edgar also do not respect Heathcliff and never accept him as a member of the Earnshaw family.

Success and Social Standing: Success and social distancing, two hallmarks of the upper class, also becomes a thematic strand when Cathy decides to marry Edgar because he is from an established family, whereas Heathcliff does not find her expectations being fulfilled. So, she chooses success and social standing over love. Similarly, Isabella also gets attracted to Heathcliff’s appearance which ruins her life.

Ironic Representation of Love: Relationships in the novel are twisted, dark, and ironic. Mr. Earnshaw loves Heathcliff, his adopted son, causing Hindley to hate and despise him. Cathy loves Heathcliff but marries Edgar Earnshaw. Similarly, Heathcliff loves Cathy to satisfy his negative impulses, yet he marries Edgar’s sister, Isabella for revenge. Through this confusing cycle of relationships, the author shows how love is a joke when it comes to success.
Patriarchy: Emily has shown the abusive nature of the patriarchal system in the novel. Earnshaw expects Cathy to behave according to her will. Edgar also puts her into a challenging situation by asking her to choose between him and Heathcliff, while Heathcliff shows power by forcing Catherine to marry his son, Linton Heathcliff.
Isolation: Isolation is another important theme presented in the novel. Hindley and Heathcliff never get united. Instead, they prefer to stay isolated. Catherine and Isabella also die separated from each other, while Heathcliff leaves the world in a quiet and secluded room.
Major Characters in Wuthering Heights

Heathcliff: Heathcliff is the central and mysterious character of Wuthering Heights. He was a gypsy boy, rescued and brought up by the Earnshaw family at Wuthering Heights. He later becomes an enemy of their son, Hindley, but shares a cordial relationship with their daughter, Cathy. Unfortunately, since childhood, Heathcliff has endured a lot of rejection and hatred such as mistreatment from Hindley, and later, his love, Cathy, betrays him by marrying Edgar Linton. These incidents has led him to vow revenge against all who have wronged him, intentionally or unintentionally, including Catherine and Edgar. He marries Edgar’s sister Isabella and tortures her for the sake of revenge on his brother, and creates trouble for almost all others. It seems that the bitter treatment he has received during his early years has transformed him into a sociopath.

Catherine: Catherine is another significant character in the novel, Wuthering Heights. She is kind and generous with calm nature and loved by everyone. Unfortunately, she leads a comfortable life after the death of her mother, Cathy. Despite facing troubles, she understands the brutality and cruelty Heathcliff went through. Later, she falls in love with Heathcliff’s son, Linton, but Linton ditches her following his father’s threat. However, she decides to marry him and takes care of him until his death. After Heathcliff dies, she restores her lost property and position with Hareton’s help and chooses to marry him.

Dean: Nelly Dean is the narrator of the story as she takes the readers back in time where she narrates the history of the Lintons and Earnshaw families to Mr. Lockwood. She is the servant of Wuthering Heights and a very loyal member of the family. Throughout the novel, she is shown as caring and compassionate and treats Heathcliff, Cathy, and Hindley as her siblings. She takes care of Cathy’s daughter, Catherine, after her death.

Edgar: Edgar Linton is an elegant aristocrat at Thrushcross Grange whom Cathy marries to gain a social position. He decides to stay loyal to Cathy but after Heathcliff’s return, his relationship with Cathy turns bitter. His jealousy toward Heathcliff further corrodes their marital relationship, leading to Cathy’s death. He tries to save his daughter from Heathcliff’s revenge but fails to do so in later life. Heathcliff then takes charge of his property and also abandons his daughter, Catherine.

Hareton: Hareton is the unfortunate son of Hindley who becomes the victim of Heathcliff’s revenge. Heathcliff treats him exactly the way his father used to treat him during his childhood while bringing him up. Hareton is a very kind-hearted and naïve character who does not know anything about cultured manners despite belonging to the upper class. He is never given a proper education. However, young Catherine’s arrival in his life changes his life’s fortune for good.

Hindley Earnshaw: He is the son of Mr. Earnshaw and Catherine’s brother. He is the one who resents the arrival of Heathcliff in his family, which later makes Heathcliff vindictive toward everyone and a sociopath. After his father’s death, he leaves no stone unturned to abuse and hurt Heathcliff, a move that later costs him dearly when Heathcliff takes all his possessions, dragging him toward awful death.

Earnshaw: Mr. Earnshaw is Catherine and Hindley’s father. He adopts and brings Heathcliff to his home but he fails to stop the mistreatment and abuse Heathcliff faces by the family members.

Isabella Linton: Isabella Linton is Edgar Linton’s sister. She suffers at the hands of love after marrying Heathcliff, who ruins her life.
Lockwood: Mr. Lockwood is a visitor to Thrushcross Grange and the narrator of the story. His interest in mysterious Heathcliff drags him to dig into the past of the Linton and Earnshaw families. Therefore, he asks Nelly Dean to tell him the story of Wuthering Heights.
Linton: He is the Sickly child of Heathcliff and Isabella. He comes to live with his father after the death of his mother. Instead of giving him fatherly love, Heathcliff uses him to execute his revenge.

Writing Style of Wuthering Heights
The writing style of the novel, Wuthering Heights, shows the impressive yet straightforward approach of the author, Emily Bronte. She fictionalizes the man who is corrupted in a society where class and social status direct the ways of life. The skillful use of the elements of gothic fiction and multiple narrative techniques shows how Emily has given her text a unique touch and individualistic feel. Having used simple diction, a serious tone, and ironic remarks on the social hierarchy of the Victorian age, Emily has presented how class distinction corrodes the social fabric of society.

Analysis of Literary Devices in Wuthering Heights
Action: The main action of the novel comprises the escape of Heathcliff from Wuthering Heights. The rising action occurs when Heathcliff returns to Wuthering Heights after three years as a wealthy gentleman. The falling action occurs when Heathcliff forces Linton and Cathy to marry and become the honor of Wuthering Heights and Thrushcross Grange.
Allegory: Wuthering Heights shows the use of allegory by presenting the main idea of how the immortal wreckage of love brings destruction to many of the characters of the novel.
Allusion: The following sentences show the use of allusion,
i. The Jonah, in my mind, was Mr. Earnshaw; and I shook the handle of his den that I might ascertain if he were yet living. (Chapter -IX)
ii. Yah knaw whet t’ Scripture ses.’ And he began quoting several texts, referring us to chapters and verses where we might find them. (Chapter -IX)
iii. Oh, I owe him so much. On only one condition can I hope to forgive him. It is, if I may take an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth; for every wrench of agony return a wrench: reduce him to my level. (Chapter -XVII)

All of these references allude to religion; first to Jonah, second to Bible, and third to Exodus verses 21 to 23.
Conflict: Several conflicts are running parallel in the novel such as; the internal and external struggle of the characters, Heathcliff’s revenge toward Lintons, and class differences.
Climax: The climax of the novel, Wuthering Heights, occurs when Heathcliff dies and Cathy and Hareton decide to get married.
Characters: Wuthering Heights presents both static as well as dynamic characters. The young woman, Cathrine Linton, and Edgar Linton are dynamic characters as they go through a transformation during the course of the novel. However, Heathcliff, Hindley Earnshaw, and several others are dynamic characters as they do not show any change in their behavior.
Foreshadowing: The following sentence shows examples of foreshadows,
i. The intense horror of nightmare came over me: I tried to draw back my arm, but the hand clung to it, and a most melancholy voice sobbed, “let me in—let me in!”“Who are you?” I asked, struggling, meanwhile, to disengage myself.”Catherine Linton,” it replied, shiveringly (why did I think of Linton? I had read Earnshaw twenty times for Linton)—”I’m come home: I’d lost my way on the moor!” (Chapter -III)
This example predicts what is going to happen in the story as this ghostly nightmare of Lockwood prefigures the major happening of the novel.
Imagery: The examples of imagery are given in the following sentences,
i. Yesterday afternoon set in misty and cold. I had half a mind to spend it by my study fire, instead of wading through heath and mud to Wuthering Heights. . . [However] I took my hat, and, after a four-mile’ walk, arrived at Heathcliff’s garden-gate just in time to escape the first feathery flakes of a snow-shower……..On that bleak hill-top the earth was hard with a black frost, and the air made me shiver through every limb. (Chapter -II)
ii. He was leaning against the ledge of an open lattice, but not looking out: his face was turned to the interior gloom. The fire had smouldered to ashes; the room was filled with the damp, mild air of the cloudy evening; and so still that not only the murmur of the beck [stream] down Gimmerton was distinguishable, but its ripples and it’s gurgling over the pebbles, or through the large stones which it could not cover. (Chapter -XXXIV)
Both examples show the use of different images such as the image of the black forest, movement, and image cloudy evening. The second example also shows the images of sound, touch, and sight.
Irony: The following sentence is a good example of situational irony,
i. She is angry at Heathcliff for not leaving sooner to make something of himself. Catherine could have had Heathcliff, but she chooses not to and ends up miserable. (Chapter -VIII)

Mood: The novel, Wuthering Heights, shows a sympathetic mood, though it becomes tragic, ironic, and highly satiric at times. Sometimes, it also becomes gloomy when Heathcliff and Catharine choose different paths.
Motifs: The most important motifs of the novel, Wuthering Heights are Doubles, repetition, and the conflict between nature and culture.
Narrator: The novel, Wuthering Heights, is narrated from the first-person point of view and also a third-person narrator.
Personification: The examples of personifications are given in the following sentences,
i. Her spirits were always at high-water mark, her tongue always going
singing, laughing, and plaguing everybody who would not do the same. (Chapter -5)
ii. It was not the thorn bending to the honeysuckles, but the honeysuckles embracing the thorn. There were no mutual concessions: one stood erect, and the others yielded: and who can be ill-natured and bad-tempered when they encounter neither opposition nor indiﬀerence? (Chapter -10)
In both of these examples, spirits, tongue, thorn, and honeysuckles have been shown as having life and emotions of their own.

Protagonist: Lockwood and Nelly Dean appear as protagonists of the novel at first. The novel starts with mysterious happenings with them and ends on a happy note. However, Heathcliff is the protagonist of the novel as the entire story revolves around him.
Point of View: The novel, Wuthering Height, presents both first and third-person points of view.
Resolution: Resolution is when all the mysteries, conflicts, and problems reach a conclusion. Wuthering Heights ends with Heathcliff’s death which eventually puts a stop to all tensions.
Setting: The setting of the novel, Wuthering Heights, is the moors of Yorkshire, England, and the story is divided between Thrushcross Grange and Wuthering Heights.


Symbols: Wuthering Heights shows the symbols of the moors, a ghost, Wuthering Heights, and Thrushcross Grange. Whereas the buildings represent two different classes, ghost stands for memories and the moors are the symbols of love and affection.
Similes: The following sentences are perfect examples of similes,
i. We all kept as mute as mice a full half-hour, and should have done so longer, only Joseph, having finished his chapter, got up and said that he must rouse the master for prayers and bed. (Chapter- V)
ii. ‘The Lintons heard us, and with one accord they shot like arrows to the door; there was silence, and then a cry, ‘Oh, mamma, mamma! (Chapter-VI)
iii. He flung himself into the nearest seat, and on my approaching hurriedly to ascertain if she had fainted, he gnashed at me, and foamed like a mad dog. (Chapter-XIV)
iv. Did she die like a saint? Come, give me a true history of the event. How did ?’ (Chapter-XVI)
These examples show the use of like to compare different things such as the first one compares them with the mice, the second their departure to arrows, the third to a mad dog, and the last to a saint.
Theme: A theme is a central idea that the novelist or the writer wants to express to the readers. The novel, Wuthering Height, shows the clash between good and evil, class distinction, and prejudice.

Wuthering Heights is one of the most beloved novels to have come out of the 
Victorian period. According to Patsy Stoneman, “Jane Eyre and Wuthering Heights 
are…still the third and fourth most borrowed books from British public libraries” 
(236). Possibly as a result of their popularity, both novels have been the focus of 
much critical attention. Wuthering Heights, however, seems to attract a much wider 
range of responses than Jane Eyre. With a fractured narrative structure and plot, a 
seemingly ambivalent moral tone, and an abundance of violence, Wuthering Heights 
posed quite a problem not only for contemporary readers, but also for critics for years 
to come. How are we to read this strange, dark novel? 

Early critics often labeled the work as clumsily constructed. The multiple 
narrative frames were seen as flaws exhibited by an inexperienced novelist. 
Similarly, critics denounced the book’s moral lessons. Heathcliff, the supposed 
villain of the novel, the one who committed many of the multiple acts of brutality and 
cruelty within the story, is not sufficiently punished for his actions. Rather, the 
ending of the novel is ambiguous; it is indeed possible that Heathcliff and Cathy are 
spiritually reunited at the close of the novel, as is suggested by the rumored ghost 
sightings. For these reasons, the majority of Bronte’s contemporary critics dismissed 
her novel as unsuccessful or even sinister. 

The perception of Bronte’s work has changed through the passage of time, 
however. Many critics now see Bronte’s multiple narrators as the careful craft of a 
gifted artist, one who pays careful attention to the smallest details to keep the novel 
unified and coherent. Also, since the advent of modernist criticism, critics’ views of 
the morality of the novel have changed. Critics in modern and post-modern periods 
began to see the truth as subjective rather than objective. In a world where truth is 
largely a matter of individual perception, the ability to judge right from wrong 
becomes difficult and sometimes unproductive. Rather than focus on what the 
characters did that was “good” or “bad,” the modern and post-modern critics focused 
on why the characters acted the way they did. This allowed for a wider interpretation 
of what constitutes good and bad behavior. Similarly, focusing on characters’ 
motivation rather than action allowed critics to see the novel as a work of art rather 
than a moral example to be followed like an instruction manual. The changing views 
of the purpose of literature allowed for a more favorable interpretation of the novel, 
then. 

In the midst of the current perspectives on Wuthering Heights, most critics can 
agree that Bronte’s use of the narrative frame was a strategic move. In addition, 
critics not only allow for, but even praise the use of, multiple perceptions in the 
revealing of the plot of the novel. What they do not agree upon, however, is why 
Bronte used this particular narrative structure to tell her story. John K. Mathison 
argues in his article “Nelly Dean and the Power of Wuthering Heights,” that Nelly’s 
unreliable narration is a tool Bronte used to allow the audience to feel sympathy 
toward Cathy and Heathcliff in a way that any other type of narration could not. He 
felt that readers felt repelled by her and, as a result of her looking down upon 
Catherine and Heathcliff, readers felt closer to them. He says, “Neither a direct plea 
nor a narrator who was a moralizing, narrow-minded hypocritically pious guardian 
could have placed us so completely with Heathcliff and Cathy” (192). William E. 
Buckler, in his article “Theme and Method in Bronte’s Seventh Chapter,” focuses on 
the ways that misconceptions and misperceptions among the various characters in the 
novel account for much of the plot development. This is why, he would argue, we 
have so many different perceptions: to move the plot along. He ignores, however, the 
reason behind why the plot must be driven by these types of misunderstandings—that 
Bronte wanted to showcase individual perception to highlight its importance. George 
J. Worth takes a different approach to the theme of multiple perceptions in his article 
“Emily Bronte’s Mr. Lockwood,” by focusing on the ways that individual characters 
within the novel, Mr. Lockwood in particular, misinterpret themselves. He does not 
go on, though, to comment on how this contributes to the many misunderstandings 
that happen in the plot of the novel. Critics also disagree about why Bronte would 
create a novel that lends itself to such a wide variety of interpretations. 

I will argue that Bronte chose to present her story in the way that she did precisely 
because she wanted to illustrate the importance of individual perception. The story is 
filtered through at least two narrators for the duration of the novel, which gives 
readers the opportunity to witness a single action through multiple perspectives. One 
event is told and then retold from another perspective to show readers that each 
character’s interpretation is different. 

Bronte elaborates on this message both in form and content. Many of the 
major turning points of the plot revolve around a misunderstanding or a difference in 
perception between characters. Heathcliff flees after hearing Catherine say that it 
would degrade her to marry him. He does not stay to hear her go on to say that she 
feels a connection to him that runs so deep that she considers than to be two halves of 

one being and that her feelings for Edgar Linton are superficial at best. Heathcliff’s 
decision to leave is based not on the “reality” of the situation; if he had known 
Cathy’s true feelings, he more than likely would have stayed. Heathcliff’s decision is 
based on, rather, on his perception of the situation. When we act on our perceptions, 
as we must, reality becomes strangely unimportant. 

Many pivotal events within the plot of the novel remain unspecified. What 
happened to solidify Heathcliff and Catherine’s relationship while Nelly was away? 
Where did Heathcliff go when he left only to return three years later? Clearly these 
are events are extremely important to furthering the plot of the novel, yet they happen 
“offstage,” so to speak, and the reader is never sure what exactly happened. Bronte 
does this on purpose. What really happened during these crucial times is irrelevant; 
people live their lives based not upon a transcendental reality but upon their 
perceptions of the events that they witness. Thus, it does not matter what formed that 
powerful bond between Catherine and Heathcliff as children—whatever events that 
transpired or “really” happened are irrelevant. What matters to us is that they, as 
children, perceived the events in such a way that they felt closer as a result. 

Moreover, what happened to Heathcliff during his absence is irrelevant—what 
matters to us is that the other characters in the novel see him as changed. Whether he 
has, indeed, been changed, the other characters in the novel see him and treat him as 
such, and it is their treatment of him that shapes their decisions and actions, which in 
turn shape Heathcliff’s. 

I intend to prove that Bronte’s purpose in writing the novel in this way was 
simple: she wanted to show that there is, in fact, no discernable “truth.” We are left 
to trust our interpretations of the situations we find ourselves in and act accordingly. 
Many critics overlook this simple, yet thorough, explanation, perhaps because 
modern readers are more open to the idea of multiple perceptions, and this view may 
seem too simplistic. In Victorian England, however, this idea would not have been so 
widely accepted. What modern critics take as a given would have been highly 
debated in Bronte’s time. This, in turn, explains why her contemporaries were so 
confused and put-off by her work—they were unable to see the multiple perspectives, 
and sometimes contradictions, as indicative of anything other than a disorganized 
author. The current perspective, though, allows readers to tie Bronte’s narrative 
frame and her theme of multiple perspectives to her place in Victorian society as well 
as her feelings about religion and morality in a way that has never before been 
examined so completely. 

Chapter One: Critical Perspectives 
Victorian England was unprepared for a novel such as Wuthering Heights. 
Reviewers of the 1848 edition of the novel had almost uniformly negative feelings 
about it. One anonymous reviewer said, “With all its power and originality, it is so 
rude, so unfinished, and so careless, that we are perplexed to pronounce an opinion on 
it, or to hazard a conjecture on the future career of the author” (Britannia 291). A 
reviewer in The Examiner seemed at best ambivalent about the book, saying, “This is 
a strange book. It is not without evidences of considerable power: but, as a whole, it 
is wild, confused; disjointed and improbable; and the people who make up the drama, 
which is tragic enough in its consequences, are savages ruder than those who lived 
before the days of Homer” (285). Bronte’s contemporaries seemed to be able to pick 
up on her great passion, certainly. They usually agreed, though, that her passions 
were misdirected. How could they condone a book that included multiple acts of 
violence that went unpunished? They didn’t. They declared Bronte’s work to be “the 
nightmare of a recluse…[and] a nightmare of the superheated imagination” (Watson 
48). The subject matter alone was enough to condemn the novel. 

The novel’s reception did not improve once the true identity of the author was 
made known, either. Emily Bronte, writing under the masculine pseudonym of Ellis 
Bell, was outed as a female author before the first reprinting of the novel in 1850. 
The violence of the novel had certainly not been accepted previously, but once 
Emily’s true identity was revealed, reviewers became even more harsh in their 
treatment of the novel and its author. According to Carol Ohmann, in her article, 
“Emily Bronte in the Hands of Male Critics,” “once the work of Ellis Bell was 
identified as the work of a woman, critical responses to it changed. Where the novel 
had been called again and again ‘original’ in 1847 and 1848, the review in the 
Athenaeum in 1850 began by firmly placing it in a familiar class, and that class was 
not in the central line of literature” (908). The positive attributes according to critics, 
which were few to begin with, essentially disappeared after the author of the novel 
was revealed. James Kavanagh agrees with this assertion, saying, 
even disapproval of Wuthering Heights was initially tempered, in many critics 
who thought they were confronting a male author, by a kind of grudging 
admiration for the courage with which the story plunged into the unknown. . . . 
When its female authorship was recognized, critical attitudes tended to change 
from camaraderie to condescension. The author was chided for her lack of mature 
feminine discretion. 

In an attempt to reverse this trend, Emily’s sister Charlotte, so famous for writing 
Jane Eyre, which was received with much more acclaim, wrote a preface to the 
novel’s first reprinting in which she tries to defend her sister’s novel while appeasing 
irate critics. The damage, however, had been done. According to Melvin Watson, 
the second edition of the novel did not “provoke any reviews which showed more 
complete understanding” (42-3). The novel remained maligned by critics. 
This seems a strange beginning for a novel that we now know as a classic. 
Ironically, it was probably because the novel prompted such strong emotions that it 
gained and maintained popularity in the years to come. One contemporary of Bronte 
stated that “Wuthering Heights is a strange sort of book—baffling all regular 
criticism; yet it is impossible to begin and not finish it; and quite as impossible to lay 
it aside afterwards and say nothing about it” (Jerrold 284). Even if they were 
disgusted, horrified, or angered by what they read, people couldn’t look away from 
Bronte’s novel. Because the novel was able to survive beyond its first reprinting, and 
was in continuous circulation after that, various audiences, which change with the 
times, were exposed to the novel. As a result, views of the novel began to shift. 
While Victorian England was shocked by the novel’s violent content and confused by 
the fragmented narration, later generations were beginning to appreciate the novel’s 
structure as deliberate rather than an unintentional blunder. Similarly, changing 
views regarding the purpose of literature in society allowed for a different 
interpretation of the seemingly immoral lesson of the novel. If literature is not solely 
mimetic or didactic, acts of violence within novels need not be so harshly 
condemned. This sentiment is echoed by Frank Kermode, who argues that 
Emily Bronte’s contemporaries operated different probability systems from ours, 
and might well ignore whatever in a text did not comply with their generic 
expectations, dismissing the rest somehow-by skipping, by accusations of bad 
craftsmanship, inexperience, or the like. . . . we can read more of the text than 
they could, and of course read it differently (50). 

Thus, modern readers were apt to see the novel differently than its contemporaries. 
With the advent of modernist criticism in the early 1900s, critics began to see 
Wuthering Heights in a much more positive light. According to Knoepflmacher, in 
his book Wuthering Heights: A Study, “whereas the Victorians try to tame the 
energies they recognize, the modernists prefer to stress the novel’s anarchic or 
libidinal powers” (108). In addition, modern critics were more apt to be open to the 
idea of multiple perspectives and subjective truth than Victorian readers. Not only 
does modern criticism allow for plurality of interpretations, it in fact encourages it. 
Frank Kermode says, “the only works we value enough to call classic are those 
which, and they demonstrate by surviving, are complex and indeterminate enough to 
allow us our necessary pluralities” (50). From the early 1900s on, the criticism of 
Wuthering Heights has been almost universally positive. 

While current critics of the novel agree that it is powerful, haunting, and 
nuanced, they cannot seem to agree on a particular interpretation of the novel itself, 
so the criticism of the novel rages on. Dorothy Van Ghent says that Wuthering 
Heights is “of all English novels, the most treacherous for the analytical 
understanding to approach” (9). This, too, is what so many of the critics can agree 
on—that they can’t agree on a single interpretation of the novel because of its 
narrative frame and plurality of perspectives. According to Felicia Gordon, in her 
book A Preface to the Brontes, “interpretations are not mutually exclusive and agree 
on the irreconcilable nature of the conflicts generated in the novel” (199-200). 
Davies declares the novel to be “A secret by its very nature, [which] cannot be 
known” and compares the novel to “music’s enigmas [which] cannot be ‘solved’” 
(91). Watson argues that because the novel is a “masterpiece of art” and “has a life 
all its own which changes, develops, and unfolds as the generations pass . . . never, 
probably, will an interpretation of Wuthering Heights be made which will satisfy all 
people for all time” (61). Carol Ohmann concurs with Watson, claiming that “the 
novel appears to be inexhaustible and it will support interpretations of widely varying 
emphasis” (906). Even Charlotte Bronte applied this same rationale not to Wuthering 
Heights, but to Emily herself, saying, “an interpreter ought always to have stood 
between her and the world” (77).The possibilities of interpretation, it seems, are 
endless. 

Some critics, though, are not content to accept the plurality of interpretations. 
Rather, each of these critics proclaims that he or she has insight into the true 
interpretation of the novel. This means, obviously, that all other interpretations are 
incorrect. Watson, for example, concludes that “The praise [of the novel] is 
rhapsodic rather than analytical; the faults usurp the foreground and are presented in 
the most unequivocal language” (44-5). He declares current criticism of the novel to 
be “rhapsodical nonsense” (45). Bruce McCullough, in his article “The Dramatic 
Novel: Wuthering Heights,” argues that “Those who have looked upon Wuthering 
Heights as being awkward and confused in structure have usually not bothered to 
consider what other method of construction the author might have elected to follow,” 
while Colin Wilson argues that “A more accomplished novelist would have used the 
device of letters and manuscripts found in drawers [but would have] spoiled the 
whole effect” (226). J. Hillis Miller condemns much of the criticism of the novel, 
saying, “Charlotte’s prefaces establish the rhetorical stance which has been 
characteristic of criticism of this novel. This stance involves dismissing most 
previous critics and claiming one has oneself solved the enigma, cracked the code” 
(173). He goes on to criticize those critics who “present [themselves] as the Daniel 
who can at last decipher the writing on the wall” and says that “The criticism of 
Wuthering Heights is characterized by an unusual degree of incoherence among the 
various explanations” (175-6). Miller ultimately concludes that “what they [critics] 
say is demonstrably mistaken . . . because there is an error in the assumption that 
there is a single secret truth about Wuthering Heights” (176). Thus, while so many 
critics now hail Bronte as a genius and her novel as a masterpiece, they cannot agree 
on much else. 

Ironically, few critics have tied their inability to agree upon a particular 
interpretation of the novel with Bronte’s intentions as an author. Certainly, they 
agree that Bronte’s use of multiple narrators was intentional and strategic, and they 
also agree that the result was a plethora of possible interpretations, but almost none 
argue that Bronte’s purpose was to show her readers the importance of multiple 
perceptions in their critical approach to the novel and in their approaches to their 
lives. Victorian readers would probably not have come to this conclusion because 
this was an idea that was both foreign and frightening. If one questions a 
transcendental truth that overrides individual perception, then one’s entire system of 
beliefs is in question. All issues relating to morality and religion become precarious 
when truth is subjective. Modern readers, though familiar with and accepting of the 
idea of subjective truth, have also overlooked the possibility that Bronte simply wrote 
her novel to prove that truth is indeed subjective. Perhaps this interpretation is so 
simple it has been overlooked, but the novel contains evidence to support this 
reading. Nicholas Marsh says in his book Analyzing Texts, “We [readers] are 
provoked to question our own activity when we are engaged in reading the novel” (4) 
and “Bronte insistently reminds us how unreliable our perceptions are” (43). 
Whatever her purpose, the novel certainly achieves this affect. 

Through both the form and content of the novel, Bronte encourages readers to 
approach her novel openly. The multiple perspectives used to convey the plot of the 
novel ensure that there is no one authoritative voice that the readers can single out as 
the “true” or “right” person to identify with. David Sonstroem says, “With all the 
characters myopic, and all their exchanges unilluminating, the reader looks elsewhere 
for authorial guidance” (38). Because readers are being told the story through at least 
two filters, and the versions of that story do not always agree, we know that “. . . 
strangely, there is truth in all these apparently conflicting notions,” (Gilbert 81) but, at 
the same time, we have “no secure viewpoint from which to ground our responses” 
(Flint 177). Readers see, then, that the point being illustrated is that individual 
perception allows for this type of structure. Everyone sees things differently, and this 
is not a particularly tidy way to view literature, but it is certainly true, and it does 
account for the way that we live our lives just as we see the characters of Wuthering 
Heights basing their feelings and actions on their individual perceptions. 
As a result, the way we see the world needs to change. Bronte shows, through 
the quick and often inaccurate judgments passed especially by her two narrators, 
Nelly and Mr. Lockwood, that our judgments are often inaccurate. According to F. 
H. Langman, “[the narrators’] responses to the story cast light upon the narrators 
themselves . . . To break down resistance to its central experience, the novel must 
somehow overcome the readers’ contrary assumptions: it does so by demonstrating 
the inadequacy of those assumptions in Lockwood and Nelly” (301). We see events, 
as they do, through our own personal filters, and what we see is not always the 
Truth—perhaps there is no Truth to see, for certainly none of us is privy to it. The 
implications of this revelation are huge, both concerning the novel and the way we 
view the world. Stoneman says, “The conclusion we have to draw is that literary 
texts are unstable constructions—that there is no ‘true’ version independent of 
particular readings” (238). Because our powers of perception prove to be less than 
perfect, people should be less quick to judge others, and more apt to look at their own 
motivations for their actions. 
 
Chapter Two: Mr. Lockwood’s Narration 
Wuthering Heights is narrated in diary format by Mr. Lockwood who came from 
London to Thrushcross Grange to rent a house from the novel’s protagonist, 
Heathcliff. Marsh says, “the aura of diary . . . is enhanced by the bald statement of 
the date ‘1801’ followed by a dash, which is the first mark of the novel” (5). Upon 
first glance, Lockwood seems to be an insufficient narrator for the novel. The 
readers’ initial confusion at being thrust into an unfamiliar plot and setting only 
grows as a result of Lockwood’s ineptitude. Knoepflmacher says “From the very 
start, Lockwood seems uncomfortable . . . about the appropriateness of his responses 
to what he observes in a reality so different from his own” (12). Lockwood arrives at 
the Heights in the middle of winter, and snow obscures pathways and landmarks 
making travel difficult, especially for someone who is new to the area as he is. In his 
article “Wuthering Heights: Narrators, Audience and Message,” Allan R. Brick states, 
“This image of a man floundering in a world of obliterated landmarks has its 
application well beyond Lockwood” (29). This is the readers’ first clue that 
Lockwood will be wandering, lost, through the novel, insufficiently prepared and 
unable to cope, and we shudder to realize that we are in his hands. 

As Lockwood reports his arrival at the Heights, his misperceptions continue. He 
proclaims an almost instant affinity with Mr. Heathcliff, and is eager to declare 
Heathcliff a “capital fellow” (3). Heathcliff’s less than hospitable nature soon makes 
itself apparent. Lockwood observes Heathcliff’s “black eyes withdraw, so 
suspiciously under their brows” and “his fingers sheltered themselves, with a jealous 
resolution, still further in his waistcoat” (3). If Heathcliff’s body language is not 
enough of an indication of his desire to be left alone, his words and actions should 
prove this point to Lockwood. Lockwood says Heathcliff’s “ ‘walk in’ was uttered 
with closed teeth and expressed the sentiment, ‘Go to the Deuce!’” (3). Lockwood, 
though, is unperturbed by Heathcliff’s lack of hospitality. Lockwood insists that 
“because he [Heathcliff] has an erect and handsome figure—and rather 
morose—possibly some people might suspect him of a degree of underbred pride . . . 
it is nothing of the sort; . . . his reserve springs from an aversion to showy displays of 
feeling—to manifestations of mutual kindliness” (5). Lockwood shows readers early 
on that he is incapable of understanding or accepting the situation he encounters at 
Wuthering Heights. Thomas Vogler says, “we observe his shocked surprise as he is 
disillusioned. Where he expects to find ‘a capital fellow’ happily ensconced in a 
‘perfect misanthropists Heaven,’ he finds Heathcliff, a ‘singular contrast to his abode 
and style of living’” (79). Lockwood is clearly out of his element in dealing with the 
residents of Wuthering Heights. Lockwood at first declares Heathcliff to be a good, 
affable man, and then, upon being treated so callously, seems, at first, blissfully 
unaware of his own miscalculation. Knoepflmacher wonders “What are we to make 
of Lockwood’s attitudes towards the Heathcliff we first behold through his eyes? Is 
he genuinely drawn to a man who so rudely dispenses with the formalities of polite 
intercourse” (12). Lockwood’s unwillingness to accept Heathcliff’s hostility reflects 
his lack of understanding of the situation. If Lockwood thought he could somehow 
change Heathcliff, he was sorely mistaken. 

His attempts at perception, however, go from bad to worse. Upon entering the 
Heights, Lockwood, speaking to Cathy, says, “ ‘Ah, your favorites [pets] are among 
these!’ pointing to an obscure cushion full of something like cats” (11). Upon closer 
inspection, Lockwood finds that the heap of what he took to be cats was actually a 
“heap of dead rabbits” (11). Cathy, surprised at his remark, replies “ ‘A strange 
choice of favorites’” (11). His blunders do not end here, however. Lockwood 
proceeds to presume that Cathy is Heathcliff’s wife, which seems to be offensive to 
both parties. Lockwood says to Heathcliff “ ‘many could not imagine the existence 
of happiness in a life of such complete exile from the world as you spend, Mr. 
Heathcliff; yet, I’ll venture to say, that, surrounded by your family and with your 
amiable lady,’” yet Heathcliff is quick to enquire “ ‘Where is she—my amiable 
lady?’” (13). Heathcliff’s next comment serves only to further confuse the already 
bewildered Lockwood: “ ‘Oh! You would intimate that her spirit has taken the post 
of ministering angel . . . even when her body is gone’” (13). Lockwood, at this point 
realizes his mistake. Even he can tell that he is “in a blunder” (13). Noticing that 
“there was too great a disparity between the ages of the parties to make it likely that 
they were man and wife,” Lockwood assumes that Hareton must be Heathcliff’s son 
and Cathy’s husband (14). He is again, however, mistaken. Lockwood declares “ 
‘Ah, certainly—I see now; you [Hareton] are the favored possessor of the beneficient 
fairy’” (14). Heathcliff once again attempts to correct Lockwood, saying, “ ‘Unhappy 
in your conjectures, sir! . . . We neither of us have the privilege of owning your good 
fairy; her mate is dead. I said she was my daughter-in-law, therefore, she must have 
married my son.’” (14). Even this, more thorough explanation eludes Lockwood’s 
understanding, though, and he asks “ ‘And this young man is—‘” (14) in reference to 
Hareton. After being assured that Hareton is not, indeed, Heathcliff’s son, Lockwood 
declares, “I began to feel unmistakably out of place in that pleasant family circle” 
(14). Even the oblivious Lockwood can see that he has made a mess of his 
interpretations. Brick says that Lockwood “rattles off one misinterpretation after 
another about the identity of the people in Wuthering Heights and their (he presumes) 
normal relations with each other, discovering progressively that the girl is not Mrs. 
Heathcliff, that she is not married to Hareton, and that Hareton is not Heathcliff’s 
son” (81). Bronte shows us Lockwood’s underwhelming ability to perceive his 
surroundings to warn us against too close an affinity with him. Miller argues, “His 
errors are a warning to the over-confident reader” (170). As Lockwood blunders 
through his first encounter at the Heights, readers lose any confidence in his ability to 
maneuver through the twists and turns of the plot that is to come.
 
Lockwood’s presumptions are nearly always incorrect, but perhaps more 
troubling is the language Lockwood uses to convey his misinterpretations. Readers 
can at once identify him as different from the other characters because of the 
complexity (or pomposity) of his language. Lockwood says in twenty words what 
another person could say in ten. Take, for example, his first spoken passage in the 
novel: “I do myself the honour of calling as soon as possible after my arrival, to 
express the hope that I have not inconvenienced you by my perseverance in soliciting 
the occupation of Thrushcross Grange” (25). This very formal speech is revealing of 
Mr. Lockwood’s character. Clearly he holds himself in high esteem and wants his 
language to reflect what he perceives to be his superior intellect. Ten out of the 
thirty-four words of the above sentence (the name of the property not included) are 
polysyllabic. Thus, the readers’ first impression of Lockwood is that he is a man 
more concerned with portraying his own aptitude than finding out the complex 
relationship of the inhabitants of Wuthering Heights, or than clearly informing his 
readers about his findings. 

If this is not off-putting enough, readers are also faced with Lockwood’s seeming 
inability to fully end a sentence. Many of his sentences are drawn out as though to 
hold readers’ attention, and the final period comes only after we are already frustrated 
with Lockwood’s long-windedness. One sentence, for example, is the length of a 
paragraph: “The ‘walk in’ was uttered with closed teeth and expressed the sentiment, 
‘Go to the deuce’: even the gate over which he leant manifested no sympathizing 
movement to the words; and I think that circumstance determined me to accept the 
invitation: I felt interested in a man who seemed more exaggeratedly reserved than 
myself” (25). In this passage, readers can again observe Lockwood’s fondness for 
lofty, multi-syllabic language, but they will also note the length of this sentence. 
Stringing readers along with semi-colons and colons leaves them panting for breath as 
they reach the finale of the sentence. Without frequent sentence breaks, readers are 
given information in large, unmanageable chunks that add to our sense of 
bewilderment with the text and, more specifically, with the narrator himself. 
Lockwood’s language shows readers, then, that he has little regard for his 
audience, which hardly works in his favor. However, he undermines his own 
credibility, which he has worked thus far to establish, by often using tentative 
language. 

In addition to Lockwood’s overly formal diction, Lockwood’s language also 
conveys his own uncertainty about his perceptions. Lockwood’s statements are often 
stilted and choppy, indicating Lockwood’s reluctance to continue through a sentence 
that he perceives to be incorrect before it’s even finished. Similarly, Lockwood’s 
language contains an abundance of the subjunctive, which shows that he feels unable 
to commit to the statements he is making, which is an indication of his awareness of 
their inadequacy. Marsh echoes this sentiment, saying, “One insistent feature . . . is 
Lockwood’s speculations. The language is filled with guesswork” (7). Lockwood’s 
attitude, as can be gauged through his language, shows uncertainty. Knoepflmacher 
says, “Although Lockwood becomes the butt of the primitive ways he half-celebrates 
and half-mocks, his uncertainty about his place in the world from which he comes 
contributes to his interest in ‘a situation so completely removed from the stir of 
society’” (15-6). He is even, it seems, uncertain about his uncertainty and how to feel 
about it. Words like “perhaps” and “maybe” show readers that, despite his 
pomposity, or rather because of it, Lockwood’s view of his surroundings is not 
necessarily accurate. In addition, Lockwood often uses the subjunctive to reflect his 
uncertainty. Take this sentence for example: “I do not believe that I could have fixed 
on a situation so completely removed from the stir of society” (25). Here, the 
subjunctive (“could”) is preceded by more uncertain language: “I . . . believe.” Not 
only is he not sure if he could be so removed, he is not sure about his uncertainty! 
Lockwood’s uncertainty, as reflected in his language, only adds to readers’ growing 
contempt for him; we see Lockwood as dishonest because of it. While clearly trying 
to portray himself as an intelligent, able person, his mangled attempts to portray his 
situation to his audience reveal his glaring inadequacies. 

Clearly, from his speech alone, we can gather that Lockwood is out of his 
element. Rod Mengham argues that “Lockwood is a poor interpreter of humanity 
because the range of his perceptions is limited by the narrowness and artificiality of 
his language” (25). Bronte has constructed a language for Lockwood that shows his 
inability through his artificiality. Lockwood uses ornate, flowery language to 
describe what readers begin to see is nothing of the sort. Knoepflmacher agrees with 
this point, saying, “A close inspection of Bronte’s brilliant opening reveals a series of 
frictions which Lockwood’s language vainly tries to avoid” (13). This is perhaps 
because “Lockwood’s voice . . . is that of an urban young gentleman whose 
sophistication and ‘worldliness’ prove to be inadequate” (Knoepflmacher 11). 
Whether he is limited by his language, or his language simply conveys his limits, 
readers maintain that Lockwood is not the most capable narrator—after all, narration 
is all about language. 

Lockwood’s language proves to be insufficient at representing the 
surroundings in which he finds himself at the Heights, but it reveals to the readers 
more than Lockwood intends. Through his language, readers can see that Lockwood 
is incapable even of understanding (or interpreting) himself. The first 
misinterpretation that Lockwood makes about himself is regarding his aversion to 
companionship. Lockwood proclaims that he is looking for a kind of escape from 
society, yet the first thing he does upon arrival at his new haven is to seek out 
companionship. Th. M. Vande says, “[Lockwood] likes to think of himself as a 
misanthropist, yet . . . [he] visit[s] and re-visit[s] Wutheirng Heights, in spite of the 
unwelcoming reception. The fact is of course that he has no idea of what real 
isolation from one’s fellow creatures means” (108). Worth argues that “She [Bronte} 
lets Lockwood characterize himself, and then helps us to realize, by letting us witness 
his character in action, that he is not really like that at all” so that readers will get a 
sense that Lockwood is so incapable of making interpretations that he cannot even 
accurately interpret himself (43). 

In addition, we begin to see that many of Lockwood’s interpretations may 
actually be projections of himself, and thus reveal more about himself than those he is 
interpreting. A good example of this is Lockwood’s eagerness to befriend Heathcliff. 
Lockwood certainly claims an affinity with Heathcliff, but Knoepflmacher argues, 
“‘The sympathetic chord’ that Lockwood at first will claim as binding him to 
Heathcliff may stem, as he notes, from an act of projection . . . But the reverse seems 
just as possible. Lockwood extracts from Heathcliff attributes he has been led to shed 
or subdue in the course of his own socialization as an educated young gentleman” 
(14). Perhaps all Lockwood sees in Heathcliff is an ideal of a rugged misanthrope 
that Lockwood wishes he could be. This reveals little about Heathcliff, but volumes 
about Lockwood’s inability to read himself.. Bald states that “Lockwood’s 
misrepresentation of his character is aimed at beguiling himself as well as the 
readers” (278). Because we see events through Lockwood’s point of view, we can 
tell that Lockwood is not being purposely deceitful or mean-spirited in his 
representation of himself. Rather, he is simply incapable of understanding. 
Even the reason that Lockwood comes to Thrushcross Grange is a 
misinterpretation. After what Lockwood felt was a harmless flirtation with a woman 
grew into something more, Lockwood panicked and quickly revoked all attention he 
had bestowed upon the woman. As a result, he felt embarrassed and wanted to flee 
society for the refuge of anonymity. What Lockwood fails to realize, however, is his 
own intention. Lockwood, while proclaiming to long for love, actually fears it. Apter 
says that “In Lockwood’s case fear of emotion rather than emotional greed or bitter 
vengefulness leads him to believe he is a highly emotional person” (207). His 
behavior, and his subsequent actions show more about his character than his 
protestations. Davies declares that “Lockwood, that human snail who ‘shrunk icily 
into myself’ when a young lady made eyes at him, frames and focuses this behavior 
through . . . downright incomprehension” (77). Ironically, Lockwood’s 
misinterpretation of his own feelings led to a miscommunication with the young lady 
in question, which is the precise reason he takes up lodgings at Thrushcross Grange in 
the first place. 

Upon his removal from Wuthering Heights, and his return to Thrushcross Grange, 
Lockwood takes ill (presumably from his prolonged exposure to the elements) and is 
displaced as narrator by Nelly Dean, the Grange’s head servant. While Lockwood is 
incapacitated, he asks Nelly to keep him company and tell him what she knows of the 
inhabitants of the Heights. Much of the remainder of the novel consists of 
Lockwood’s diary entries that capture Nelly’s narrative of the tale. Now, readers see 
that they are receiving the tale through a double filter. Arnold Krupat says in his 
article “The Strangeness of Wuthering Heights,” “[Nelly and Lockwood] are the chief 
narrators of the book . . . there is no existence for the events of Wuthering Heights 
independent of their existence in the diction of Nelly [and] Lockwood” (273). Miller 
declares, “Wuthering Heights is presented as a kind of Chinese box of enclosures 
within enclosures” (207). At this point, readers will perhaps begin to let down their 
guard despite their further removal from the events of the plot simply because they 
are glad that the person now in charge of the tale is not Lockwood, whom they have 
come to mistrust. This conclusion, while understandable, is presumptuous. After all, 
the same rules of perception that applied to Lockwood apply even more so to Nelly, 
who has not the impartiality of an uninvolved bystander. Many of Lockwood’s 
misperceptions can be blamed on his unfamiliarity with the situation in which he 
finds himself, yet readers must be critical of Nelly for the opposite reason. As the tale 
continues, readers will see that Nelly’s involvement in the story she is telling 
certainly prevented her from experiencing the events in an impartial way as they 
happened, and from telling the story in an objective manner. 

According to Kavanagh, “It is important to ‘see’ Nelly’s activity in this text not so 
much to understand the non-existent ‘mind’ of another character, but in order to resist 
the offer of a narrative ego that Nelly’s voice carries” (32). Nelly possesses several 
qualities that Lockwood lacks as a narrator. Lockwood arrived at the Height having 
no prior knowledge of the house or its inhabitants. Nelly, however, has the benefit of 
hindsight. Having played an active role in the story she is telling, Nelly is able to 
“fashion the narrative from scratch by recounting authentic developments as well by 
adding her own touches of exaggeration in regard to the heroes’ actions and by . . . 
obliterating her own harmful deeds” (Shunami 457). Mathison agrees and says that, 
“her ability to describe accurately, and yet disregard the facts in favor of explanation 
by a conventional formula, is a major feature of her character and her inadequacy as a 
counselor” (191). Through Nelly’s own not-so-subtle rationalizations of her actions, 
as the glimpses of other perspectives through letters and dialogue, readers can gather 
that “neither of the two main narrators, Lockwood and Nelly, is capable of 
interpreting the story adequately” (Langman 71). 

Nelly’s agency in the plot becomes apparent early on in her narrative. She begins 
her tale with the arrival of the novel’s protagonist, Heathcliff, to the Earnshaw family. 
She makes no attempt to conceal her dislike for Heathcliff from the start, saying “Mr. 
Earnshaw told me to wash it, and give it clean things, and let it sleep with the 
children” (37). Referring to the child as “it,” Nelly reveals that her opinion about 
Heathcliff was secured before he had even spoken one word. Thus, “Nelly is not an 
objective observer” (Langman 72-3). Her actions as well as her opinions are present, 
though. In her telling of the tale, Nelly proceeded to directly disobey Mr. Earnshaw 
and “put it on the landing of the stairs, hoping it might be gone on the morrow” (37). 
Nelly, then, openly admits to her own involvement in the tale she is telling. 
The message that readers received from Lockwood’s inept narration (that the 
narration is unreliable) is furthered by the addition of Nelly’s voice. Shunami says, 
“even the narrative presented by her [Nelly] is unreliable” (454). Knoepflmacher 
agrees, saying, “even Nelly’s closer, eye-witness account of events . . . proves to be 
unreliable” (16). Ultimately, “The conversations between them [Nelly and 
Lockwood] merely demonstrate with greater emphasis their incongruity in the role of 
reliable narrator” (Shunami 465). Readers discover two important truths early in the 
novel: the reliability of their narrators is in question and, perhaps, any reliability of 
perception is in question. 
 
Chapter Three: Plot Development 
The unreliability of human perception is a theme that represents itself not only in 
the structure of the novel (the fragmented narration), but throughout the content as 
well. In fact, misinterpretation and misperception are the driving forces of the plot. 
This serves to reinforce Bronte’s message about the frailty of subjective 
interpretation. 

While Bronte establishes Catherine and Heathcliff’s closeness early in the novel, 
Catherine’s extended absence form the Heights during her recovery at Thrushcross 
Grange proves to put a strain on their relationship. Heathcliff anticipates that his 
Cathy will return to him wild and unchanged, but, upon her return to Wuthering 
Heights, he is greeted not by his former playmate, but by a lady. Here begins a series 
of misunderstandings and hurt feelings which lead to the ultimate separation of the 
pair and irrevocably alters the courses of their lives. 

Heathcliff, having become even more “careless, and uncared for,” during 
Catherine’s absence, comes to greet her looking “dismally beclouded” (54). This 
does not seem to pose much of a problem at first since Catherine had often been in a 
similar state. She arrives, though, “a very dignified person,” as opposed to the “wild, 
hatless little savage she once was” (53). Heathcliff, of course, notices this change at 
once and is disturbed by how dirty he looks in comparison. Catherine runs to greet 
him, but notices his “black and cross” face and assumes that he is not happy to see her 
(52). Heathcliff interprets Cathy’s comments as insults, thinking she is referring only 
to his appearance and not his sullen demeanor. This is the first step in a series of 
many that drives the young couple apart—each, according to Nelly, began “to feel 
that the one’s interest was not the chief consideration in the other’s thoughts” (92). 
This suspicion is seemingly confirmed when Heathcliff flees and Catherine 
“could not comprehend how her remarks should have produced such an exhibition of 
bad temper” (Bronte 55). Nelly, who provides constant and critical commentary 
interprets Heathcliff’s behavior as “ill humor,” but readers, aware of Nelly’s 
unreliability as a narrator, can “see in it a boy’s heartbreak and loneliness” (Longman 
70). In addition, Catherine doesn’t see how her actions “lead Heathcliff to revolt” 
(Buckler 70). Each is left to feel somehow abandoned by the other, while both long 
for nothing but each other. 

Now on the defensive, Catherine and Heathcliff’s relationship becomes strained. 
The recurring presence of Edgar Linton in Cathy’s life serves to reinforce to 
Heathcliff the message that he is soon to be shut out of her life forever. The situation 
comes to a critical crossroads when Catherine declares to Nelly that she has received 
and accepted a marriage proposal from Edgar Linton. Nelly, of course, is surprised at 
this revelation—Catherine’s love for Heathcliff was, after all, no secret. Nelly 
inquires about the nature of Catherine’s affections for Linton, and Catherine responds 
“he is handsome and pleasant to be with . . . . he is young and cheerful . . . . he loves 
me . . . I love the ground under his feet, the air over his head, and everything he 
touches, and every word he says—I love his looks, and all his actions, and him 
entirely, and altogether” (78-9). Catherine’s “bitter parody of a genteel romantic 
declaration” “shows how effective her education has been in indoctrinating her with 
the literary romanticism deemed suitable for young ladies” (Gilbert and Gubar 277). 
Here, Catherine displays the rehearsed, false nature of her feelings for the young man 
she has just agreed to marry.
 
Nelly, aware of Catherine’s discontent, asks “you love Edgar, and Edgar loves 
you. . . . where is the obstacle?” (79). Catherine replies, “In whichever place the soul 
lives” (80). Although she would like nothing better than to be joined with Heathcliff 
forever, Catherine feels that Heathcliff’s questionable origins, paired with his lack of 
education, will prove to be too much for them to overcome. Thus, Cathy sees that a 
marriage to the considerably more prosperous Edgar Linton will be a way for her to 
improve both her own future prospects and those of Heathcliff, too. When Cathy tells 
Nelly that she has agreed to marry Edgar, Nelly warns her, “As soon as you become 
Mrs. Linton, he [Heathcliff] loses friend, and love, and all! Have you considered how 
you’ll bear the separation, and how he’ll bear being quite deserted in the world?” (81-
2). Nelly sees in Catherine’s marriage to Edgar an obvious and unavoidable obstacle 
to Cathy and Heathcliff’s union. Cathy, though, rather than seeing this likely 
outcome of her choice, sees her marriage to Edgar as the only chance she and 
Heathcliff have to be together. She says in response to Nelly’s comment, “I shouldn’t 
be Mrs. Linton were such a price demanded! He’ll [Heathcliff will] be as much to me 
as he has been all his lifetime . . . did it never strike you that, if Heathcliff and I 
married, we should be beggars? Wheras, If I marry Linton, I can aid Heathcliff to 
rise and place him out of my brother’s power?” (82). Matthews says, “Catherine 
thinks that she can concentrate on the strictly practical advantages of marriage 
because to her the potency of their [her and Heathcliff’s] love escapes confinement to 
any recognized container. Conversely, Catherine’s match with Edgar is the soul of 
conventional romantic love” (58-9). Thus, Catherine’s interpretation of marriage, or, 
at least, of her marriage, does not imply her lack of devotion to Heathcliff; rather, it 
shows her willingness to make sacrifices for him because, as Gibert and Gubar 
mention, “Catherine has no [other] meaningful choices. Driven from Wuthering 
Heights to Thrushcross Grange and held fast in the jaws of reason, education, 
decorum, she cannot do otherwise than as she does, must marry Edgar because there 
is no one else for her to marry and a lady must marry” (277). Catherine, then, will 
use what seems to be the only option available to her to be close to Heathcliff, even if 
it means betraying her soul. 

Cathy’s misperception of the end result of her union with Edgar ultimately brings 
about the very end she was attempting to avoid—one without Heathcliff. Prior to 
Cathy’s heartfelt confession, Catherine asked Nelly “Are you alone, Nelly?” (77). 
Nelly, knowing that Heathcliff was in earshot, replied, “Yes, Miss” (77). Nelly goes 
on to say, “[Heathcliff is] About his work in the stable,” which is an outright lie (77). 
Kavanaugh says, “Nelly controls the crucial piece of information in the scene, the 
knowledge of Heathcliff’s presence, and this gives her decisive power within the 
communicative structure of the scene” (45). Nelly decides to remain silent about 
Heathcliff’s presence, and, thus, changes the course of both Catherine’s and 
Heathcliff’s lives. During Cathy’s confession to Nelly, Heathcliff overhears her 
profession—or part of it. Catherine says, “if the wicked man in there [Hindley] had 
not brought Heathcliff so low, I shouldn’t have thought of it [marrying Edgar]. It 
would degrade me to marry Heathcliff now” (81). Upon hearing these words, 
Heathcliff flees, unable to hear that her very next utterance is, “so he shall never 
know how I love him” (81). Misunderstandings here are rampant. Due to Nelly’s 
“outright lie” (Mengham 80), Catherine made a confession that she might not have 
otherwise made. Similarly, because he was unaware of the direction Cathy’s speech 
would take, Heathcliff hears, “just enough to drive him away” (Kavanaugh 45). 
Mengham notes that “the truth might have sent Cathy after Heathcliff in time to 
prevent misunderstanding and avert disaster,” (80), but “Nelly’s silence here is not 
passive, but active” (Kavanaugh 48) and she continues to lie until Heathcliff’s 
disappearance is final. As a result of these misunderstandings and Nelly’s lies, both 
Catherine’s and Heathcliff’s lives are forever changed. 

Heathcliff’s disappearance leaves Catherine a changed woman. Her lengthy 
illness, as a result of her tireless search for Heathcliff on the rain-soaked moors, 
seems to have stolen some of her happy spirit. Catherine’s family is told by her 
doctor that “she would not bear crossing much, she ought to have her own way” (89). 
It is worth noting here that Nelly, whom the reader will notice has become more and 
more entangled with plot development, sees Catherine’s illness as ridiculous and 
within Catherine’s control. She sees in Catherine’s cries of desperation at 
Heathcliff’s absence the tantrum of a spoiled child, and in the resulting illness she 
sees something Catherine could call up on a whim; Nelly refuses to acknowledge the 
seriousness of Catherine’s illness or that it’s origin lies outside of Catherine’s will. 
These misunderstandings on Nelly’s part will eventually bring about Catherine’s 
untimely death. 

In the three years that Heathcliff is gone, Catherine marries Edgar and seems to 
settle into a state of normalcy. Because she is unaware of just what caused 
Heathcliff’s abrupt departure, Catherine interprets his actions as abandonment, and 
has no reason to believe he will ever return home. They both are somewhat surprised 
at the turn of events that follows. The audience, upon Heathcliff’s return home, 
learns that Heathcliff, who had all those years before overheard and in part 
misunderstood Cathy’s speech, had left not out of spite or malice, but in hopes of 
self-betterment, so that Catherine would not see marriage to him as degrading. 
Because this intent was never made known to Catherine, she, thinking that Heathcliff 
had gone forever, proceeded with her life by marrying the only prospect she had left: 
Edgar. Again, because of a series of misfortunate misunderstandings, Catherine and 
Heathcliff are denied their union. 

With Heathcliff’s return, Catherine seems to believe that her earlier idea of a 
marriage to Edgar as enabling a relationship with Heathcliff is once again possible. 
Neither man, however, is willing to play a part in Catherine’s scheme. Each character 
is incapable of understanding what the other feels is quite plain. Individual 
perception has, ultimately, derailed all three lives: Edgar, Catherine, and Heathcliff. 
After a particularly nasty fight between Edgar and Heathcliff, in which Catherine 
is forced to choose between the two, she is overcome by a fit of rage the likes of 
which her doctor warned could be a catalyst for disaster. Catherine exclaims, “Well, 
if I cannot keep Heathcliff for my friend—if Edgar will be mean and jealous, I’ll try 
to break their hearts by breaking my own” (116). Then, Catherine, here in the later 
stages of pregnancy, proceeds to lock herself in her room. This is where perhaps the 
most tragic misinterpretation of events unfolds. Nelly, having heard Catherine’s 
ominous pronouncement, assumes “that Catherine is in total control of her situation 
(Gates 131). According to Mengham, “Nelly’s common sense tells her that anyone 
capable of switching on their fits of passion is equally capable of switching them off 
again, but she [Nelly] cannot appreciate the intensity of Cathy’s distress” (81). Since 
Nelly feels that Catherine is only acting as an overindulged child, and because “Nelly 
dislikes Cathy, as she frequently admits,” she “repeatedly distinguishes herself from 
the other servants, [and] speaks as a member of the house, and even alludes to her 
superiority to those she serves” (London 47). When Edgar asks about Catherine, 
Nelly tells him “There is nothing in the world the matter” (118). Despite her 
awareness of the doctor’s warning about angering Catherine, and, despite Catherine’s 
pregnancy, Nelly “keeps to herself Cathy’s warning that she is dying, and even 
deliberately antagonizes her . . . by creating a false impression of Edgar’s response to 
the situation” (Hafley 191). Because Nelly assumes that Catherine is simply 
throwing a tantrum which she is in complete control of, Nelly presumptively decides 
that exaggerating about Edgar’s lack of concern for his wife will be just the thing to 
snap her out of her rage. Nelly, as so many characters have done already, makes a 
grave misjudgment of the situation. Newman says, “Nelly’s practice of seeing and 
telling, far from maintaining family order, is disruptive . . . . the acts of narration that 
Nelly’s gaze makes possible produces consequences she can neither predict nor 
control” (1035). Shunami agrees, saying, “her [Nelly’s] sanctimonious position 
results from an ignorance of her true roles and a misunderstanding of the spirit of 
others. She is therefore incapable of recognizing the fact that her decisions bring 
about the tragic crisis of the novel” (457). Nelly’s overconfidence in her “feeling that 
she can manage her mistress’ life better than her mistress” causes Catherine’s illness 
to go unchecked (Shunami 455), and “it is her breach of trust which brings about 
Catherine’s dying scene” (Ward 124). 
The three crucial plot developments that affect the outcome of the 
novel—Catherine’s decision to marry Edgar Linton, Heathcliff’s decision to leave 
Wuthering Heights, and Catherine’s death, all resulted from misperceptions and 
misinterpretations. Catherine and Heathcliff’s lives were guided, not by the reality of 
the situations in which they found themselves, but by their perceptions of that reality. 
Although readers may never know if the characters’ actions would have been 
different had their perceptions been different, this is irrelevant, for, like the characters 
in the novel, we are all forced to make the decisions that shape our lives based on our 
perceptions at the moment, even though this can bring about the type of tragic ending 
seen in the novel. 
As Bronte shows, individual perception is the most important influence in our 
lives. In fact, through Bronte’s novel, readers can see that individual perception can, 
indeed, create a type of reality in itself. Nicholas Marsh asks, “How far is reality not 
a separate thing at all, but only created out of human will, and subjective perceptions 
driven by emotion?” (74). Reality is created, then, from perceptions of events that 
happen, but also from speculation about events that did not happen. Lowder-Newton 
says, “In any work, of course, it is not only what a text does say but what it dos not 
say that reveals its relation to dominant images, ideas, and values,” and Wuthering 
Heights is no different (9). In the novel, three important pieces of the plot are left as 
complete mysteries: Heathcliff’s origins, the cause of Catherine and Heathcliff’s 
close bond, and Heathcliff’s whereabouts during his three year absence from the 
Heights. 

Since the novel’s original publication, audiences have been intrigued by the 
mysterious Heathcliff. Mr. Earnshaw, who brings the boy home from a trip to 
Liverpool, tells only “a tale of his seeing it starving, and houseless and as good as 
dumb in the streets . . . where he picked it up and inquired for its owner . . . he 
thought it better to take it home with him, at once, than run into vain expenses there; 
because he was determined he would not leave it as he found it” (37). Mr. 
Earnshaw’s family is quite shocked at this new arrival, but Mr. Earnshaw says, “you 
must e’en take it as a gift of God; though it’s as dark almost as if it came from the 
devil” (36). This hardly answers any questions the family may have about the boy. 
This seemingly critical information of Heathcliff’s origins is never revealed 
within the novel. Stevenson says, “The remarkable indefiniteness of Heathcliff is 
established the moment he arrives at Wuthering Heights” (67). The boy “repeated 
over and over again some gibberish that nobody could understand,” which indicates 
that whomever was caring for the boy previously had spoken a language other than 
English (36-7). This clue, though, doesn’t offer much help because, “Being found in 
Liverpool, he could have come from the far ends of the earth, he could be a Lascar or 
a gypsy” (Sagar 144). Williams attributes significantly darker origins to Heathcliff, 
saying, “Heathcliff is touched in to recognizable existence by the harvest moon, his 
dark shape emerging from the character of dark shadows caused by the moon’s light” 
(48). Many critics share this supernatural view of Heathcliff and wonder “Is he 
homeless waif to be pitied or diabolic emissary to be feared?” (Guerard 64). Still 
other critics propose that Heathcliff “could be a child of sin, even a bastard of 
Earnshaw’s” (Last Name 144). Ultimately, because Heathcliff’s true origins are not 
made known, “None of these doors to understanding is ever really closed; but none 
opens wide enough to let the whole Heathcliff through” (Sonstroem 35). As a result, 
“Heathcliff is the outcast, the castaway, the Lascar or gypsy or disinherited prince” 
(Miller 219-20). 

The characters in the book are just as ignorant of Heathcliff’s origins as the 
audience, but, for this novel, the more significant meaning of Heathcliff’s 
indeterminate origins is not that he is free to define himself, but that “every character 
he comes in contact with . . . is forced to mark him with a meaning they give him” 
(Stevenson 69-70). Mr. Earnshaw, we can gather, had some reason to take such pity 
on the young boy that he brought him home, so Earnshaw’s affection for Heathcliff is 
no surprise. Even the name bestowed upon the boy is one that had belonged to “a son 
who died in childhood” (Bronte 38). Visick says, “he favours Heathcliff,” (173) and 
Eagleton argues, “Earnshaw pets and favours him, and in doing so creates fresh 
inequalities in the family hierarchy” (225). If Heathcliff is a blank slate to begin 
with, Mr. Earnshaw’s treatment of him is the first indication to the rest of the family 
of how to treat the boy. 

Hindley, who had been the family’s only son, feels extremely threatened by 
Heathcliff’s presence. Even Heathcliff’s name makes Hindley feel inadequate: why 
would his father bring back this orphaned boy from Liverpool when he already had a 
son, and why would he bestow this boy with a name that belonged to a beloved but 
departed son? According to Williams, “[Mr. Earnshaw’s] primitive, brittle system of 
demarcation forces Hindley into the position of ‘reprobate’ : for him, Heathcliff is a 
‘usurper’” (21-1). Heathcliff’s sudden arrival and promotion to favorite brings 
nothing but feelings of resentment from Hindley. Gordon says, “As if in response to 
his own worst fears, Hindley is duly supplanted in his father’s affections by 
Heathcliff” (198). What is worth noting here is that Hindley’s feelings of hatred and 
resentment arise due to a feeling of abandonment and betrayal from his father. 
Neither Heathcliff’s actions, nor his origins, which are, of course, unknown, have 
contributed to Hindley’s estimation of him. Nevertheless, Hindley bases his 
treatment of Heathcliff on his perceptions of the situation. Ironically, the very 
feelings of betrayal Hindley feels upon Heathcliff’s arrival drive his behavior, which 
is both cruel and unjust, and this only further’s Mr. Earnshaw’s affection for the 
friendless Heathcliff. This cycle of misinterpretation was set into motion by pure 
speculation, and, as a result, Heathcliff’s true origins become unimportant. 

Hindley is not the only character to judge Heathcliff without reason. Essentially, 
all characters are forced to make some kind of assumptions about Heathcliff’s 
background in order to determine how to incorporate him into their lives. Nelly does 
not hide the fact that she, like Hindley, was also unpleasantly surprised by 
Heathcliff’s arrival. Nelly “consistently refers to the child as ‘it,’ denying Heathcliff 
any human status. He is not only threatened with callous indifference, he is subjected 
to active and gratuitous cruelty . . . ‘bad feeling’ arises from within the family itself 
rather than from Heathcliff” (Holderness 30). Nelly’s reasons for disliking Heathcliff 
are actually very similar to Hindley’s. Knoepflmacher says, “old Earnshaw had 
treated Nelly almost as one of his own children . . . small wonder that Nelly tries to 
remove the alien child” (45). Similarly, “Nelly always managed to take Hindley’s 
barbarities in stride” because she, obviously, has taken Hindley’s side against 
Heathcliff (Mengham 64). She seems to see something demonic in Heathcliff’s 
origins as well, but again, we can see that this idea reflects more on Nelly’s 
superstition than on Heathcliff’s moral fiber. Even when Nelly softens and 
“encourages Heathcliff to frame high notions of his birth,” she still gives no hint to 
Heathcliff’s true background because “she is obviously trying to project on to him the 
inspiration she derives from her own daydreams of advancement” (Mengham 76). 
Once more, Nelly’s assessment and treatment of Heathcliff have nothing to do with 
his origins—only her imaginings of them. 

Because Heathcliff’s presence evokes such unpleasant feelings from both Nelly 
and Hindley, “spontaneous rejection is . . . Heathcliff’s first experience at Wuthering 
Heights, before he has done anything to deserve it” (Sagar 143-3). Bearing this in 
mind, Heathcliff’s actions appear less brutal and more frustrated. He is not the 
monster they see him as. Matthews says, 
Since Heathcliff is so regularly misrepresented as the thrust of stormy nature at 
the foundations of culture, it might be worth pointing out that Heathcliff, having 
survived the Earnshaws’ instinctive equation of his swarthiness with bestiality, 
constantly surprises Nelly by being more refined, better mannered, and more 
amply furnished than the loutish gentry at which he takes aim . . . Even when 
Heathcliff behaves at his most despicable, he invariably turns out to be reflecting 
the violence inherent in the structure of social order (61-2). 
Hagan agrees, saying, “his violence has been building up only gradually and only 
under the stress of provocation. For this reason, though we may deplore his 
subsequent actions, he never entirely forfeits our sympathy” (65). Because we see 
Heathcliff’s creation through the cruelty of others, “All of us, at one time or another, 
have identified with Heathcliff’s victimization with his gorgeous, sadistic rage” 
(Yaeger 225). How would we have turned out any differently, we wonder, were we 
in this position? 

The only character who takes a liking to Heathcliff beside Mr. Earnshaw is 
Catherine. The cause of the close bond between Catherine and Heathcliff is another 
important plot development that is kept “off-stage” so to speak. Nelly, who is 
narrating Heathcliff’s arrival, had been “sent out of the house” for her “inhumanity” 
toward Heathcliff, and returned to find that “Miss Cathy and he were now very thick” 
(37-8). Nelly, who had returned only “a few days” after her banishment, was 
surprised at this development because Catherine had “showed her humour by 
grinning and spitting at the stupid little thing” and “refused to have it in bed” just 
days before (37). Bronte has strategically devised a reason to send Nelly, the only 
one who could report on exactly why Catherine and Heathcliff bond so quickly and 
completely, away during the very act. Nelly seems surprised yet uninterested by this 
new development, in all likelihood, because she has never been too fond of Miss 
Cathy herself. Knoepflmacher says, 
she [Nelly] seems totally uncurious about the genesis of Catherine’s change of 
heart towards Heathcliff . . . Had she [Cathy], her father’s former favorite, 
decided to regain some of Old Earnshaw’s withdrawn love by identifying herself 
with his new love object? Such explanations seem inadequate. For Bronte wants 
no causal clues to account for her book’s arch-relation between male and female 
selves who claim that each is the other. Mystery must be maintained (95-6). 
Essentially, what exactly created such a close bond between these two characters is 
irrelevant, and, thus, omitted. What does matter to readers is that the two demonstrate 
this feeling of closeness in a way that proves its existence beyond all doubt. The 
feeling, not the cause, is highlighted because it is that intense connection which drives 
the actions of the pair. Stevenson says “they feel an identity of being that their adult 
lives, their deaths, even, cannot alter,” and this is what Bronte wants her readers to 
see (64). 

Another of the novel’s unsolved mysteries is Heathcliff’s whereabouts during his 
three year absence from Wuthering Heights. Heathcliff’s departure was both swift 
and secret, and, just as no one had any idea when or if he would return, they were also 
ignorant of where he went. Nelly is the first to see Heathcliff upon his homecoming, 
and she finds him so changed that, at first, she does not recognize him. Nelly says, 
“And you are Heathcliff? But altered!” and then asks “Have you been for a soldier?” 
(94). Heathcliff does not answer her question, nor does he ever give an answer. 
Heathcliff left a wild, gypsy boy and returned “a tall, athletic, well-formed man” (96). 
Heathcliff’s physical changes prompt many to assume he was somehow involved 
in the military, yet he also possesses, “A half-civilized ferocity” paired with a 
demeaner “quite divested of roughness” which seems to defy categorization (96). 
Heathcliff’s explanation of his absence creates more questions than it answers. He 
says to Cathy, “I’ve fought through a bitter life since I last heard your voice, and you 
must forgive me, for I struggled only for you” (97). In addition, Heathcliff’s 
newfound gambling ability creates curiosity: where did he learn such skills? 
Much like Heathcliff’s first encounter with the Earnshaw family, here, Heathcliff 
returns to the house new and mysterious, and the cause of his great transformation is 
never revealed. Also like the beginning of the novel, the cause of the changes in 
Heathcliff is left out because it is unimportant. The other characters see Heathcliff as 
different and treat him as such. Hindley and Nelly, who previously held a sense of 
contempt for Heathcliff, are now wary of his increased physical strength and 
calculating mind. Edgar Linton, who once scoffed at the idea of Heathcliff as a rival 
for Cathy’s affection, is reduced to tears after one encounter with the new man. The 
way the other characters treat Heathcliff, with a newfound sense of awe that is part 
respect and part terror, is likely much more influential than the years that changed 
him. 

To highlight the importance of individual perception in shaping our lives, Bronte 
makes a point of leaving these key scenes and bits of information out of her novel so 
that readers will focus not on the actual events but the way that people’s perceptions 
of these events guide their actions and their lives. Nicholas Marsh says, “however 
much the narrator guesses, interferes, or imposes a different language on events, 
Bronte never allows the narrative to solve the fundamental problems of the book . . . 
the subject of storytelling, and the distortion that any narrative imposes on life itself is 
brought up between the characters” (18-9). Macovski agrees, saying, “despite the 
reader’s ‘bewilderment’ and even ‘ultimate bafflement’ at such mysteries, it is 
difficult to deny that the novel is about the act of interpretation itself” (101). We 
interpret the story that Lockwood interprets, based on Nelly’s interpretations, but, 
more importantly, each of us serves as interpreter of our own lives, and our 
interpretations are more influential than the events themselves. 

Chapter Four: The Ambivalence of Morality and Religion 
Upon its initial publication, reviewers of Wuthering Heights found the novel to be 
shockingly violent and immoral. Rylance says, “Most readers were baffled—and 
angry. Wuthering Heights was offensive and incomprehensible to most, like the 
reviewer in the Examiner who could detect no purpose or moral in it, or that in the 
spectator who found it ‘coarse and disagreeable’” (165). Given the subject matter of 
the novel and the “social and ideological needs of the late 1840s,” this was not 
surprising (Rylance 165). Reviewers, in general, condemned the novel for its lack of 
moral purpose. One anonymous reviewer remarked, “Acton, when left altogether to 
his own imaginations, seems to take a morose satisfaction in developing a full and 
complete science of human brutality. In Wuthering Heights he has succeeded in 
reaching the summit of this laudable ambition” (300). Another reviewer commented 
that “we must . . . stipulate with him that he shall not drag into light all that he 
discovers of coarse and loathsome, in his wanderings, he may find necessary to 
elucidate his history” (287). Bold agrees, saying, “Nowhere is there any respite or 
escape. There is neither triumph nor moral retribution” (83). Jerrold wonders “what 
may be the moral which the author wishes the reader to deduce from his work” (285). 
According to Miles, one of “The moralizing nineteenth-century reviewer[s] detecting 
such unorthodoxy slammed the book down, roundly damned it as a ‘pest-house’ and, 
by way of critical judgment, offered the injunction ‘burn Wuthering Heights’” (36). 
Clearly, the lack of an obvious moral center was troubling to the novel’s 
contemporary reviewers. 

Critics of Wuthering Heights noted two aspects of the novel that were particularly 
troubling. The first was that the novel’s many violent characters go unpunished for 
their bad deeds. This leads audiences to a second point—Bronte seems to offer no 
authoritative moralizing voice to praise the pious or condemn the corrupt. In Bronte’s 
work, the two types of characters are treated equally, and Bronte passes no judgement 
on any of her characters. These were the very points that lead readers to pose the 
question ‘just what are we to be getting out of this work?” 
Heathcliff is the character whose violent actions are so often fixed upon by critics. 
Rylance says, “In its sharpest form, the problem revolves, as it always has done, 
around the moral ambiguity, glamour and degradation that is Heathcliff” (166). 
Bronte’s protagonist, despite his moral shortcomings, is portrayed in such a way that 
readers can never fully condemn him. Wilson says, “Heathcliff may be ‘black 
browed’ and insulting, but it is fairly clear that Emily Bronte admires him” (228). 
Hagan agrees, saying, “One of Emily Bronte’s major achievements in Wuthering 
Heights is to keep alive the reader’s sympathy for . . . Heathcliff” (59). Aside from 
condemning the novel for this very reason, readers may also wonder why Bronte went 
about creating characters that while committing cruel acts, were still deserving of our 
sympathy. 

Just as Bronte focuses on how perceptions and interpretations shape our decisions, 
she also sheds light on how this affects our views of morality. When we focus on 
invention rather than action, morality becomes much more difficult to judge. For 
example, if readers see Hindley’s treatment of Heathcliff as reflecting the insecurity 
of a young boy who feels unsure of his father’s affections, we are much more 
understanding of his plight. After all, how can we know we wouldn’t react the same 
way given the circumstances? This same idea can be applied to virtually all of the 
characters in the novel. Matthison says, “The question is not whether Heathcliff and 
Catherine are good or bad. They are the result of psychological isolation and 
misunderstanding working on a particular native temperament, and the ‘good’ are as 
much doers of the damage as the ‘bad’” (181-2). Thus, this type of value judgment is 
unimportant, but also unproductive. All people are capable of committing good and 
bad actions given the right circumstances and perceptions. The labels of “good” and 
“bad” oversimplify morality and completely ignore individual motivation. 
Bronte is able to further this message by serving as an example in the way that she 
withholds judgment of the characters herself. Fraser says, “What makes her virtually 
unique among writers dealing with this matter [wickedness], however, is the equal 
force with which she can also show both the causes of this conduct and the defects of 
those who suffer from it” (224). As a result, she “extends the net of her sympathy so 
widely” (Winnifrith 14) that she “does not explicitly condemn or approve of her 
characters, nor does she imply judgement through the introduction of a machinery of 
rewards and punishments responsive to a moral order” (Sonstroem 38). By 
withholding punishment and moral condemnation, Bronte encourages readers to keep 
in mind both the good and bad that lie within all people, and how circumstances and 
perceptions, and not innate tendencies, drive people’s actions. 

If traditional views of morality are being brought into question, readers certainly 
will begin to look for clues about the author’s perspective on religion as well. 
Bronte’s non-traditional treatment of Christianity has brought into question her own 
personal religious beliefs. While religion does play a role in the novel, Glen reminds 
us that “It was within the discourse of religion that much of their [the Bronte’s] 
thinking was framed. More than any other aspect of the Bronte’s mental universe, 
this one is foreign to the twenty-first century reader, to whom, all too often, any 
invocation of the Bible signifies unquestioning belief” (9). Certainly, Bronte is able 
to comment on religion without implying her total acceptance or rejection of it. 
Taylor argues, “I see no evidence that Emily considered herself a Christian . . . Rather 
. . . she adapted Christian modes of thought to her own independent purposes, finding 
in those modes analogues by which she might render intelligible the patterns of her 
own spiritual experience” (94). Robinson agrees with this estimation, saying, “this 
quiet clergyman’s daughter, always hearing evil of Dissenters, has therefore from 
pure courage and revolted justice became a dissenter herself” (4). Regardless of the 
particulars of Bronte’s own religious beliefs, she does encourage taking a critical look 
at Christianity and all that it entails. 

The two main proponents of Christianity within the novel are Nelly Dean and 
Joseph. While Bronte refrains from passing judgment on her characters, “No doubt 
she herself did find some characters more sympathetic than others” (Cecil 148). In 
fact, one of the least sympathetic characters is Joseph, the cantankerous caretaker at 
the Heights. It is not a coincidence that Joseph is also the mouthpiece for 
conventional Christianity. Nelly declares Joseph to be “the wearisomest selfrighteous pharisee that ever ransacked a Bible to rake the promises to himself and 
fling the curses on his neighbors” (42). Thus, “Bronte depicts . . . a world in which 
Christianity is both hypocritical and inept” (Champion 53). For Joseph, religion is a 
way to justify his contempt for the family he serves while, at the same time, 
maintaining his own sense of superiority. Gordon says, “In Joseph, Emily mocks 
some of the worst aspects of Calvinism, a spiteful, self-righteous fanaticism” (200-1). 
Joseph participates constantly in the very type of judgmental moralizing that Bronte 
warns us against, and Sagar says, “Joseph is the only representative of Christianity in 
the novel and it is a mark of Emily Bronte’s uncompromising fearlessness that he 
should be also the most evil character” (145). Joseph’s example of self-serving 
Christianity was certainly created to warn readers against the very type of 
uncompromising judgment he represents. 

While Joseph is certainly the most obvious mouthpiece for religion in the novel, 
he is not the only character to represent Christianity. Nelly Dean, one of the novel’s 
chief narrators, also represents Christianity. Nelly, as we have seen, is disapproving 
of Joseph’s interpretation of Christianity, but she “seems to have equally little 
relevance to the lives of the chief characters. She believes that good will be rewarded 
and evil punished, and that we may all meet again in a bitter world” (Gordon 201). 
Nelly certainly is not immune to a smug sense of superiority gained from her 
religious beliefs. Th. M. Vande says, “Her [Nelly’s] stilted words do not exactly call 
up a picture of Christian charity” (198-9). As we have seen through Nelly’s actions, 
due to a sense of self-righteousness, Nelly often determines herself to be a better 
judge of right from wrong than anyone in the novel. This type of judgment not only 
brought about the chief crisis in the novel (Catherine’s death), but is also 
unproductive in light of the ambiguity of moral judgments. Without knowing each 
character’s perceptions, and, thus, motivation, how can Nelly profess an ability to 
proclaim these characters “good” or “bad”? Though Nelly’s version of Christianity is 
less dependent on fire and brimstone than Joseph’s version, it is equally as 
judgmental, and, thus, equally inept. 

While Nelly and Joseph represent Christianity within the novel, the other 
characters contribute their less traditional views on the subject. This can best be 
illustrated through each characters’ discussions of his or her interpretation of the 
afterlife. Just as each character has a unique view of his or her situation and 
surroundings, all of the characters in the novel express a desire for a different type of 
afterlife. The stormy moors which so delight Catherine and Heathcliff would serve 
them as a perfect heaven, yet “Certainly one can no more imagine a place for dainty 
and dull Lockwood, or even for good though conventionally worshipping and 
conniving Nelly in Cathy and Heathcliff’s turbulent paradise than Joseph can a place 
for the protagonists in his” (Maynard 208). The climate is not the only distinction 
between these character’s ideas of heaven. Catherine’s heaven is an extension of 
earthly delights. Nussbaum says, “Cathy’s spring is not upward, but a horizontal 
movement—not toward heaven, but toward her beloved moors and winds, severed 
from which she would find heaven miserable; not toward God but toward Heathcliff, 
the lover of her soul” (395). As a result, “Catherine’s heaven . . . is very much like 
the place such a representative gentleman as Lockwood would call hell” (Gilbert and 
Gubar 87). Conversely, the idea of a Christian heaven looks more like hell to 
Catherine, which she expresses to Nelly early in the novel. She says, 
I’ve dreamt in my life dreams that have stayed with my ever after, and changed 
my ideas . . . If I were in heaven, Nelly I should be extremely miserable . . . . 
heaven did not seem to be my home; and I broke my heart with weeping to come 
back to earth; and the angels were so angry that they flung me out, into the middle 
of the heath on the top of Wuthering Heights; where I woke sobbing for joy (80-
1). 

This heaven, for Catherine, is hellish. Nussbaum says, “Cathy’s soul cannot live in 
the Christian heaven” (394). For Cathy, “heaven is seen as rigidly hierarchical, while 
hell is energetic and delightful” (Abraham 100). Vibrant, lively Catherine feels 
stifled in the still, stagnant heaven that she imagines is so different from Wuthering 
Heights. 

Heathcliff, too, expresses a non-traditional view of heaven and hell. Heathcliff’s 
only qualification for heaven seems to be Catherine’s presence. Thus, after her death, 
“The world without Catherine has become a hell for Heathcliff” (Aptner 219). After 
Catherine’s death, “Heathcliff’s heaven is six feet underground” because “It is 
wherever Catherine is” (Sagar 158). Heathcliff holds this view up until his death. He 
tells Nelly, “no minister need come; . . . I tell you, I have nearly attained my heaven; 
and that of others is altogether unvalued and uncoveted by me” (333). Indeed, 
according to Heathcliff’s definition of hell as extreme emotional suffering, the years 
following Catherine’s death must have been all but unbearable. 

Because the characters in the novel have such varied interpretations of what 
constitutes heaven and hell, Christianity, or religion in general, becomes not a 
transcendental truth, but just another subjective interpretation of morality and the 
afterlife. Sonstroem says, “The concept of heaven provides further ground for 
inconclusive disagreement . . . each person’s heaven is composed of those qualities 
that are most appealing to him; so there are as many heavens implied in the novel as 
there are points of view” (35-6). As a result, to Catherine and Heathcliff, “Their 
attachment defines their world and provides their own morality . . . . No laws other 
than those which pertain to their attachment are binding upon them” (Apter 209-10). 
The dissolution of religion in Bronte’s work serves to further her theme of individual 
perception as guiding people’s lives. Just as there is no worldly Truth, there is no 
absolute in spirituality either. Even ideas of heaven and hell or good and bad are 
open to interpretation, and these interpretations are the basis for the character’s 
actions in the novel. 
 
Chapter Five: The Ultimate Loneliness of the Human Condition 
In Emily Bronte’s world, the only constant characters have to rely on is their 
perception. Social constructs of religion and morality offer little in the way of uniting 
people when they, too, are based on individual subjectivity. Characters don’t even 
have accurate perceptions of themselves because, after all, who they are is largely 
determined by how others see them. Macovski says, “rhetorical exposures before an 
other come to represent not only the separate interpretation of self and other, but the 
actual fashioning of this self in terms of other” (105). Because we can only ever be 
sure of our own individual perceptions, we can never really know ourselves. 
According to Jackson, “The many partial, dual, multiple and dismembered selves 
scattered throughout literary fantasies violate the most cherished of all human unities: 
the unity of ‘character’” (82-3). This way of looking at people’s characters is 
upsetting because “ ‘otherness is all that threatens ‘this’ world . . . with dissolution” 
(Jackson 57). This is probably part of what was so upsetting about Wuthering 
Heights after its initial publication. The feeling of not being able to fully know 
ourselves is, certainly, unsettling. 

What is perhaps more unsettling than this is the next logical conclusion: if we can 
not even know ourselves, we can never really know another person. Kinkead-Weeks 
says, “It is in the heart that each of us ultimately lives and dies alone” (77). Marsh 
echoes this sentiment, saying “the unknowable mystery of other people is affirmed 
(10). As a result, “We are left with the impression that there are very different 
realities, each hardly recognizable to another character . . . By constructing several 
simultaneous strands of narrative, then, Emily Bronte succeeds in emphasizing the 
power of subjective emotion in determining what characters perceive and the separate 
worlds of self in which they live” (Marsh 110). The implications of this pose a 
seemingly insurmountable obstacle to love as we have defined it; for how can we love 
another without really knowing him or her? 

This ultimately poses quite a problem for Catherine and Heathcliff. Because 
“Bronte insists upon the relativity and shortcomings of all of her characters’ 
perceptions, including those of Heathcliff and Catherine,” (Sonstroem 33) she “makes 
us consider from the start that the obstacles to deep love are not only obstacles 
created by superficial, social deadness and hypocrisy” (Nussbaum 399) but limited 
perceptions as well. This “incapacity of the central lovers to utter their relation” 
(Matthews 54) is reflected by readers’ own inability to grasp the exact nature of their 
relationship. Farrell says, “We can almost see Catherine and Heathcliff, and yet we 
cannot . . . we can’t get a clear view of Catherine and Heathcliff as transcendent 
beings. Our view of them, and their view of each other, is always screened by the 
text of the world” (191-2). Blondal says, “the passion which devours Heathcliff and 
Catherine, symbols of man’s inability to attain the absolute, is a force proceeding 
from nothingness” (151). The frustration that readers feel as they attempt to 
understand Catherine and Heathcliff’s relationship is a reflection of the intensity with 
which they are attempting to understand just the same thing. 

As a result of this lack of understanding, the type of relationship that Catherine 
and Heathcliff seek is virtually impossible. Marsh says, “They both fear that the 
other is not absolute in love. Catherine is frightened that Heathcliff will forget her 
after she dies; and Heathcliff rejects her demanding talk, angrily dismissing all ideas 
of limitation in the face of his absolute love” (148). Upon Catherine’s death, 
Heathcliff, unable to stand the thought of a wider rift between he and his beloved, 
says, 
May she wake in torment! . . . Catherine Earnshaw, may you not rest as long as I 
am living! . . . I know that ghosts have wandered the earth. Be with me always— 
take any form—drive me mad! Only do not leave me in this abyss where I cannot 
find you! Oh, God! It is unutterable! I cannot live without my life! I cannot live 
without my soul! (169). 

Now the separation of Catherine and Heathcliff has to overcome not only the 
limitations of their individual perceptions, but the physical chasm of death. 
In death, Catherine alludes Heathcliff even more. Catherine’s first appearance as 
a ghost in the novel is not to Heathcliff, but to Lockwood, who sees “a child’s face 
looking through the window” (25). She laments, “I’ve been a waif for twenty 
years”(25). Lockwood, in his terror, screams, which awakes Heathcliff. Upon 
hearing Lockwood’s tale, Heathcliff exclaims, “Cathy, do come. Oh, do—once
more! Oh! My heart’s darling, hear me this time—Catherine at last!” (28), but, “The 
spectre showed a spectre’s ordinary caprice; it gave no sign of being” (28-9). Despite 
Heathcliff’s desperate plea that Catherine haunt him, readers learn that Heathcliff has 
been unable to make contact with Cathy in all these years. Rather, he has suffered 
through the agony of almost seeing her, of glimpses of her face that vanish upon 
closer inspection, of an unsubstantiated feeling that she is near. Heathcliff is haunted, 
definitely, but not in the way that he imagined. Instead, he gets hints of her presence 
that disappear as soon as he pursues them. These glimpses drive him to go to 
Catherine’s gravesite to dig up her body. There, he says, 
it seemed that I heard a sigh from some one above, close at the edge of the grave, 
and bending down . . . There was another sigh, close at my ear. I appeared to feel 
the warm breath of it displacing the sleet-laden wind. I knew no living thing in 
flesh and blood was by—but as certainly as you perceive the approach to some 
substantial body in the dark, though it cannot be discerned; so certainly I felt that 
Cathy was there, not under me, but on the earth. . . . I looked round impatiently—I 
felt her by me—I could almost see her, yet I could not! I ought to have sweat 
blood then, from the fervor of my supplications to have but one glimpse! I had 
not one. She showed herself, as she often was in life, a devil to me! And, since 
then, sometimes more, and sometimes less, I’ve been the sport of that intolerable 
torture! (289-90). 
This type of haunting is unbearable because it resembles a magnified version of the 
separation he and Cathy endured while she was alive. Their desired union is now 
impossible. 

What makes the situation even worse is that Bronte makes sure that for every 
supernatural occurrence in the novel, a logical explanation is possible. Of course, 
there is a possibility that Catherine’s appearance to Lockwood “exists only in 
Lockwood’s dream” (McSweeny 168). Gordon says, “Heathcliff’s extraordinary 
reaction to Lockwood’s account strengthens the ghost’s reality for the reader: . . . 
Heathcliff, for one, clearly ‘believes’ in Catherine’s ghost” (195-6), but Sonstroem 
counters by saying, “the strength of his belief in them [ghosts] is no warrant for their 
existence” (42). Heathcliff’s experience in the graveyard could indicate Catherine’s 
spiritual presence, yet Marsh argues that “Heathcliff’s emotions are so powerful that 
they create an illusion in his brain . . . On the one hand, he ha a powerful grasp of 
reality. On the other hand, his emotions cannot accept the pain they experience in 
living through change” (50-1). Similarly, Heathcliff seems to encounter Catherine’s 
ghost at the close of his life, yet Hagan reminds us that “by this time, in order to 
achieve his desire [a reunion with Catherine], he has also begun to starve himself, and 
thus the possibility that he is suffering only from a hallucination is distinctly left 
open” (69). The fact that each of these encounters has a perfectly logical explanation 
only makes Catherine that much more elusive. Is she really tormenting Heathcliff, or 
is Heathcliff tormenting himself? 

When Heathcliff dies at the close of the novel, the other characters, as well as the 
readers, can only speculate about what happened to his soul. Is Joseph correct that 
“Th’ divil’s harried off his soul” (335), and that Heathcliff is suffering some sort of 
eternal punishment for his actions while on earth? Or should we assume like 
Lockwood and Nelly that “the dead are at peace” (337), and Heathcliff’s sins have 
been forgiven? Or should we believe, like the small boy who claims to have seen 
them, that “They’s Heathcliff and a woman, yonder” (336) in the heaven that they 
dreamed of on the moors? Like everything else in this book, no one can know for 
sure the fate of Catherine or Heathcliff in the afterlife. Were they able to finally 
overcome the limitations they faced to create the complete union they so desired? 
Can transcendental truth be achieved? Each of us has only our beliefs, shaped by our 
perceptions, to help us make that decision, but the very possibility that could be 
together gives some comfort in an otherwise bleak ending. 

Wuthering Heights has gone from a hated and perhaps even feared novel at its 
publication to a well-respected and admired novel today. This change of heart can be 
attributed to society’s changing perspective of the purpose of literature. Victorians 
saw literature as primarily mimetic: it should mirror life as exactly as possible in 
order to serve literature’s second goal of being didactic, or teaching lessons. 
Wuthering Heights did not accomplish either of these goals for Victorian audiences. 
Modern readers, though, are able to appreciate literature as art. Wuthering Heights is 
beautiful because of, not in spite of, its originality of plot and structure, which is more 
symbolic than mimetic. Similarly, modern readers do not look to literature for moral 
or behavioral guidelines. Thus, we can appreciate the tragic beauty of the novel 
without feeling that it should be followed as an instruction manual. 
The novel seems made for modern criticism. Davies says, “Wuthering Heights 
demolishes the assumptions of the given world. The church decays in the course of 
the novel; God is mocked; gender norms reversed. The novel is not radical but 
recidivist; uninterested in social protest, it exhibits an extremist’s skepticism. It is 
one of the great prose poems in our language” (93). Modern readers not only accept 
but revel in the type of deconstruction Bronte performs in her novel. Also, Bronte’s 
use of a fragmented narrative frame to structure her novel was innovative and daring. 
Dobree says, “Today the method is the ordinary one—it was not so much the routine 
in 1846 . . . the story does not suffer from the usual defect of the narrator method, that 
of seeing people from only one point of view” (114-5). Marsh agrees, saying, 
“Wuthering Heights is so unlike any other production of its own time that it invites 
comparison with novels of the twentieth century, when several writers set out to 
challenge or change the conventions of the genre” (197). The very pluralism that 
Bronte employs in her novel is now favored and even expected. Thus, the 
fragmentation of her plot, which was once considered her greatest shortcoming, was 
actually one of her greatest achievements. 

Interestingly, the enigma of Bronte’s novel is what has both condemned it and 
made it so famous. While many current critics bicker about who holds the key to 
unlocking the mystery of Wuthering Heights, I assert that, in fact, there is no key. 
There is not even really a mystery. As I have shown, Bronte uses both form and 
content to display to readers that we should be aware of the frailty of our perceptions 
while at the same time reminding us that, frail as they may be, our perceptions are all 
we have to rely on in making the decisions that shape our lives. Yes, readers 
experience many different interpretations of the novel, and this just furthers my 
assertions of Bronte’s purpose. Each interpretation is unique, because each individual 
critic’s perception is, of course, his or her own. 

In both her form and her content, Bronte was a revolutionary thinker much ahead 
of her time. The haunting beauty of the novel has captured reader’s interest for more 
than a century, and, whether readers loved it or hated it, they could not deny the 
novel’s power, nor could they forget it. Cecil says, “Alone of Victorian novels, 
Wuthering Heights is undimmed, even partially, by the dust of time” (144). Although 
only time can tell how the novel will be approached by future audiences, we can 
speculate that they will be intrigued by it just as we have. 